CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Biology
FIGURE 1.1 This NASA image is a composite of several satellite-based views of Earth. To make the whole-Earth
image, NASA scientists combine observations of different parts of the planet. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1 Themes and Concepts of Biology
1.2 The Process of Science
INTRODUCTION Viewed from space, Earth (Figure 1.1) offers few clues about the diversity of life
forms that reside there. The first forms of life on Earth are thought to have been microorganisms
that existed for billions of years before plants and animals appeared. The mammals, birds, and
flowers so familiar to us are all relatively recent, originating 130 to 200 million years ago. Humans
have inhabited this planet for only the last 2.5 million years, and only in the last 300,000 years
have humans started looking like we do today.
1.1 Themes and Concepts of Biology
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and describe the properties of life
• Describe the levels of organization among living things
• List examples of different sub disciplines in biology
Biology is the science that studies life. What exactly is life? This may sound like a silly question
with an obvious answer, but it is not easy to define life. For example, a branch of biology called
virology studies viruses, which exhibit some of the characteristics of living entities but lack others.
It turns out that although viruses can attack living organisms, cause diseases, and even reproduce,6
1 • Introduction to Biology
they do not meet the criteria that biologists use to define life.
From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with four questions: What are the shared
properties that make something “alive”? How do those various living things function? When faced
with the remarkable diversity of life, how do we organize the different kinds of organisms so that
we can better understand them? And, finally—what biologists ultimately seek to understand—how
did this diversity arise and how is it continuing? As new organisms are discovered every day,
biologists continue to seek answers to these and other questions.
Properties of Life
All groups of living organisms share several key characteristics or functions: order, sensitivity or
response to stimuli, reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, regulation/homeostasis,
energy processing, and evolution. When viewed together, these eight characteristics serve to
define life.
Order
Organisms are highly organized structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple,
single-celled organisms are remarkably complex. Inside each cell, atoms make up molecules.
These in turn make up cell components or organelles. Multicellular organisms, which may consist
of millions of individual cells, have an advantage over single-celled organisms in that their cells
can be specialized to perform specific functions, and even sacrificed in certain situations for the
good of the organism as a whole. How these specialized cells come together to form organs such
as the heart, lung, or skin in organisms like the toad shown in Figure 1.2 will be discussed later.
FIGURE 1.2 A toad represents a highly organized structure consisting of cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems.
(credit: "Ivengo(RUS)"/Wikimedia Commons)
Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli
Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light or
respond to touch (Figure 1.3). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals (a
process called chemotaxis) or light (phototaxis). Movement toward a stimulus is considered a
positive response, while movement away from a stimulus is considered a negative response.
Access for free at openstax.org1.1 • Themes and Concepts of Biology
FIGURE 1.3 The leaves of this sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) will instantly droop and fold when touched. After a few minutes, the plant
returns to its normal state. (credit: Alex Lomas)
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this video (http://openstax.org/l/thigmonasty) to see how the sensitive plant responds to a touch stimulus.
Reproduction
Single-celled organisms reproduce by first duplicating their DNA, which is the genetic material, and then dividing it
equally as the cell prepares to divide to form two new cells. Many multicellular organisms (those made up of more
than one cell) produce specialized reproductive cells that will form new individuals. When reproduction occurs, DNA
containing genes is passed along to an organism’s offspring. These genes are the reason that the offspring will
belong to the same species and will have characteristics similar to the parent, such as fur color and blood type.
Adaptation
All living organisms exhibit a “fit” to their environment. Biologists refer to this fit as adaptation and it is a
consequence of evolution by natural selection, which operates in every lineage of reproducing organisms. Examples
of adaptations are diverse and unique, from heat-resistant Archaea that live in boiling hot springs to the tongue
length of a nectar-feeding moth that matches the size of the flower from which it feeds. Adaptations enhance the
reproductive potential of the individual exhibiting them, including their ability to survive to reproduce. Adaptations
are not constant. As an environment changes, natural selection causes the characteristics of the individuals in a
population to track those changes.
Growth and Development
Organisms grow and develop according to specific instructions coded for by their genes. These genes provide
instructions that will direct cellular growth and development, ensuring that a species’ young (Figure 1.4) will grow
up to exhibit many of the same characteristics as its parents.
78
1 • Introduction to Biology
FIGURE 1.4 Although no two look alike, these kittens have inherited genes from both parents and share many of the same characteristics.
(credit: Pieter & Renée Lanser)
Regulation/Homeostasis
Even the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate internal
functions, such as the transport of nutrients, response to stimuli, and coping with environmental stresses.
Homeostasis (literally, “steady state”) refers to the relatively stable internal environment required to maintain life.
For example, organ systems such as the digestive or circulatory systems perform specific functions like carrying
oxygen throughout the body, removing wastes, delivering nutrients to every cell, and cooling the body.
To function properly, cells require appropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and concentrations of
diverse chemicals. These conditions may, however, change from one moment to the next. Organisms are able to
maintain homeostatic internal conditions within a narrow range almost constantly, despite environmental changes,
by activation of regulatory mechanisms. For example, many organisms regulate their body temperature in a process
known as thermoregulation. Organisms that live in cold climates, such as the polar bear (Figure 1.5), have body
structures that help them withstand low temperatures and conserve body heat. In hot climates, organisms have
methods (such as perspiration in humans or panting in dogs) that help them to shed excess body heat.
FIGURE 1.5 Polar bears and other mammals living in ice-covered regions maintain their body temperature by generating heat and reducing
heat loss through thick fur and a dense layer of fat under their skin. (credit: "longhorndave"/Flickr)
Energy Processing
All organisms (such as the California condor shown in Figure 1.6) use a source of energy for their metabolic
activities. Some organisms capture energy from the Sun and convert it into chemical energy in food; others use
chemical energy from molecules they take in.
Access for free at openstax.org1.1 • Themes and Concepts of Biology
FIGURE 1.6 A lot of energy is required for a California condor to fly. Chemical energy derived from food is used to power flight. California
condors are an endangered species; scientists have strived to place a wing tag on each bird to help them identify and locate each individual
bird. (credit: Pacific Southwest Region U.S. Fish and Wildlife)
Evolution
The diversity of life on Earth is a result of mutations, or random changes in hereditary material over time. These
mutations allow the possibility for organisms to adapt to a changing environment. An organism that evolves
characteristics fit for the environment will have greater reproductive success, subject to the forces of natural
selection.
Levels of Organization of Living Things
Living things are highly organized and structured, following a hierarchy on a scale from small to large. The atom is
the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter that retains the properties of an element. It consists of a nucleus
surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules. A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms
held together by a chemical bond. Many molecules that are biologically important are macromolecules, large
molecules that are typically formed by combining smaller units called monomers. An example of a macromolecule is
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (Figure 1.7), which contains the instructions for the functioning of the organism that
contains it.
910
1 • Introduction to Biology
FIGURE 1.7 A molecule, like this large DNA molecule, is composed of atoms. (credit: "Brian0918"/Wikimedia Commons)
LINK TO LEARNING
To see an animation of this DNA molecule, click here (http://openstax.org/l/rotating_DNA2).
Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surrounded by membranes; these are called organelles.
Organelles are small structures that exist within cells and perform specialized functions. All living things are made of
cells; the cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living organisms. (This requirement
is why viruses are not considered living: they are not made of cells. To make new viruses, they have to invade and
hijack a living cell; only then can they obtain the materials they need to reproduce.) Some organisms consist of a
single cell and others are multicellular. Cells are classified as prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Prokaryotes are single-
celled organisms that lack organelles surrounded by a membrane and do not have nuclei surrounded by nuclear
membranes; in contrast, the cells of eukaryotes do have membrane-bound organelles and nuclei.
In most multicellular organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out the
same function. Organs are collections of tissues grouped together based on a common function. Organs are present
not only in animals but also in plants. An organ system is a higher level of organization that consists of functionally
related organs. For example vertebrate animals have many organ systems, such as the circulatory system that
transports blood throughout the body and to and from the lungs; it includes organs such as the heart and blood
vessels. Organisms are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Single-celled
prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are also considered organisms and are typically referred to as
microorganisms.
Access for free at openstax.org1.1 • Themes and Concepts of Biology
VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 1.8 From an atom to the entire Earth, biology examines all aspects of life. (credit "molecule": modification of work by Jane
Whitney; credit "organelles": modification of work by Louisa Howard; credit "cells": modification of work by Bruce Wetzel, Harry Schaefer,
National Cancer Institute; credit "tissue": modification of work by "Kilbad"/Wikimedia Commons; credit "organs": modification of work by
Mariana Ruiz Villareal, Joaquim Alves Gaspar; credit "organisms": modification of work by Peter Dutton; credit "ecosystem": modification of
work by "gigi4791"/Flickr; credit "biosphere": modification of work by NASA)
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Tissues exist within organs which exist within organ systems.
1112
1 • Introduction to Biology
b. Communities exist within populations which exist within ecosystems.
c. Organelles exist within cells which exist within tissues.
d. Communities exist within ecosystems which exist in the biosphere.
All the individuals of a species living within a specific area are collectively called a population. For example, a forest
may include many white pine trees. All of these pine trees represent the population of white pine trees in this forest.
Different populations may live in the same specific area. For example, the forest with the pine trees includes
populations of flowering plants and also insects and microbial populations. A community is the set of populations
inhabiting a particular area. For instance, all of the trees, flowers, insects, and other populations in a forest form the
forest’s community. The forest itself is an ecosystem. An ecosystem consists of all the living things in a particular
area together with the abiotic, or non-living, parts of that environment such as nitrogen in the soil or rainwater. At
the highest level of organization (Figure 1.8), the biosphere is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represents the
zones of life on Earth. It includes land, water, and portions of the atmosphere.
The Diversity of Life
The science of biology is very broad in scope because there is a tremendous diversity of life on Earth. The source of
this diversity is evolution, the process of gradual change during which new species arise from older species.
Evolutionary biologists study the evolution of living things in everything from the microscopic world to ecosystems.
In the 18th century, a scientist named Carl Linnaeus first proposed organizing the known species of organisms into a
hierarchical taxonomy. In this system, species that are most similar to each other are put together within a grouping
known as a genus. Furthermore, similar genera (the plural of genus) are put together within a family. This grouping
continues until all organisms are collected together into groups at the highest level. The current taxonomic system
now has eight levels in its hierarchy, from lowest to highest, they are: species, genus, family, order, class, phylum,
kingdom, domain. Thus species are grouped within genera, genera are grouped within families, families are grouped
within orders, and so on (Figure 1.9).
FIGURE 1.9 This diagram shows the levels of taxonomic hierarchy for a dog, from the broadest category—domain—to the most
specific—species.
The highest level, domain, is a relatively new addition to the system since the 1970s. Scientists now recognize three
domains of life, the Eukarya, the Archaea, and the Bacteria. The domain Eukarya contains organisms that have cells
with nuclei. It includes the kingdoms of fungi, plants, animals, and several kingdoms of protists. The Archaea, are
single-celled organisms without nuclei and include many extremophiles that live in harsh environments like hot
springs. The Bacteria are another quite different group of single-celled organisms without nuclei (Figure 1.10). Both
the Archaea and the Bacteria are prokaryotes, an informal name for cells without nuclei. The recognition in the
1970s that certain “bacteria,” now known as the Archaea, were as different genetically and biochemically from
other bacterial cells as they were from eukaryotes, motivated the recommendation to divide life into three domains.
This dramatic change in our knowledge of the tree of life demonstrates that classifications are not permanent and
will change when new information becomes available.
Access for free at openstax.org1.1 • Themes and Concepts of Biology
In addition to the hierarchical taxonomic system, Linnaeus was the first to name organisms using two unique names,
now called the binomial naming system. Before Linnaeus, the use of common names to refer to organisms caused
confusion because there were regional differences in these common names. Binomial names consist of the genus
name (which is capitalized) and the species name (all lower-case). Both names are set in italics when they are
printed. Every species is given a unique binomial which is recognized the world over, so that a scientist in any
location can know which organism is being referred to. For example, the North American blue jay is known uniquely
as Cyanocitta cristata. Our own species is Homo sapiens.
FIGURE 1.10 These images represent different domains. The scanning electron micrograph shows (a) bacterial cells belong to the domain
Bacteria, while the (b) extremophiles, seen all together as colored mats in this hot spring, belong to domain Archaea. Both the (c) sunflower
and (d) lion are part of domain Eukarya. (credit a: modification of work by Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, NIH; credit b: modification
of work by Steve Jurvetson; credit c: modification of work by Michael Arrighi; credit d: modification of work by Frank Vassen)
EVOLUTION CONNECTION
Carl Woese and the Phylogenetic Tree
The evolutionary relationships of various life forms on Earth can be summarized in a phylogenetic tree. A
phylogenetic tree is a diagram showing the evolutionary relationships among biological species based on
similarities and differences in genetic or physical traits or both. A phylogenetic tree is composed of branch points, or
nodes, and branches. The internal nodes represent ancestors and are points in evolution when, based on scientific
evidence, an ancestor is thought to have diverged to form two new species. The length of each branch can be
considered as estimates of relative time.
In the past, biologists grouped living organisms into five kingdoms: animals, plants, fungi, protists, and bacteria. The
pioneering work of American microbiologist Carl Woese in the early 1970s has shown, however, that life on Earth
has evolved along three lineages, now called domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Woese proposed the
domain as a new taxonomic level and Archaea as a new domain, to reflect the new phylogenetic tree (Figure 1.11).
Many organisms belonging to the Archaea domain live under extreme conditions and are called extremophiles. To
construct his tree, Woese used genetic relationships rather than similarities based on morphology (shape). Various
genes were used in phylogenetic studies. Woese’s tree was constructed from comparative sequencing of the genes
that are universally distributed, found in some slightly altered form in every organism, conserved (meaning that
these genes have remained only slightly changed throughout evolution), and of an appropriate length.
1314
1 • Introduction to Biology
FIGURE 1.11 This phylogenetic tree was constructed by microbiologist Carl Woese using genetic relationships. The tree shows the
separation of living organisms into three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Bacteria and Archaea are organisms without a nucleus
or other organelles surrounded by a membrane and, therefore, are prokaryotes. (credit: modification of work by Eric Gaba)
Branches of Biological Study
The scope of biology is broad and therefore contains many branches and sub disciplines. Biologists may pursue one
of those sub disciplines and work in a more focused field. For instance, molecular biology studies biological
processes at the molecular level, including interactions among molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins, as well
as the way they are regulated. Microbiology is the study of the structure and function of microorganisms. It is quite a
broad branch itself, and depending on the subject of study, there are also microbial physiologists, ecologists, and
geneticists, among others.
Another field of biological study, neurobiology, studies the biology of the nervous system, and although it is
considered a branch of biology, it is also recognized as an interdisciplinary field of study known as neuroscience.
Because of its interdisciplinary nature, this sub discipline studies different functions of the nervous system using
molecular, cellular, developmental, medical, and computational approaches.
FIGURE 1.12 Researchers work on excavating dinosaur fossils at a site in Castellón, Spain. (credit: Mario Modesto)
Access for free at openstax.org1.1 • Themes and Concepts of Biology
Paleontology, another branch of biology, uses fossils to study life’s history (Figure 1.12). Zoology and botany are the
study of animals and plants, respectively. Biologists can also specialize as biotechnologists, ecologists, or
physiologists, to name just a few areas. Biotechnologists apply the knowledge of biology to create useful products.
Ecologists study the interactions of organisms in their environments. Physiologists study the workings of cells,
tissues and organs. This is just a small sample of the many fields that biologists can pursue. From our own bodies to
the world we live in, discoveries in biology can affect us in very direct and important ways. We depend on these
discoveries for our health, our food sources, and the benefits provided by our ecosystem. Because of this,
knowledge of biology can benefit us in making decisions in our day-to-day lives.
The development of technology in the twentieth century that continues today, particularly the technology to
describe and manipulate the genetic material, DNA, has transformed biology. This transformation will allow
biologists to continue to understand the history of life in greater detail, how the human body works, our human
origins, and how humans can survive as a species on this planet despite the stresses caused by our increasing
numbers. Biologists continue to decipher huge mysteries about life suggesting that we have only begun to
understand life on the planet, its history, and our relationship to it. For this and other reasons, the knowledge of
biology gained through this textbook and other printed and electronic media should be a benefit in whichever field
you enter.
CAREER CONNECTION
Forensic Scientist
Forensic science is the application of science to answer questions related to the law. Biologists as well as chemists
and biochemists can be forensic scientists. Forensic scientists provide scientific evidence for use in courts, and their
job involves examining trace material associated with crimes. Interest in forensic science has increased in the last
few years, possibly because of popular television shows that feature forensic scientists on the job. Also, the
development of molecular techniques and the establishment of DNA databases have updated the types of work that
forensic scientists can do. Their job activities are primarily related to crimes against people such as murder, rape,
and assault. Their work involves analyzing samples such as hair, blood, and other body fluids and also processing
DNA (Figure 1.13) found in many different environments and materials. Forensic scientists also analyze other
biological evidence left at crime scenes, such as insect parts or pollen grains. Students who want to pursue careers
in forensic science will most likely be required to take chemistry and biology courses as well as some intensive math
courses.
FIGURE 1.13 This forensic scientist works in a DNA extraction room at the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Laboratory. (credit: U.S. Army
1516
1 • Introduction to Biology
CID Command Public Affairs)
Scientific Ethics
Scientists must ensure that their efforts do not cause undue damage to humans, animals, or the environment. They
also must ensure that their research and communications are free of bias and that they properly balance financial,
legal, safety, replicability, and other considerations. Bioethics is an important and continually evolving field, in which
researchers collaborate with other thinkers and organizations. They work to define guidelines for current practice,
and also continually consider new developments and emerging technologies in order to form answers for the years
and decades to come.
Unfortunately, the emergence of bioethics as a field came after a number of clearly unethical practices, where
biologists did not treat research subjects with dignity and in some cases did them harm. In the 1932 Tuskegee
syphilis study, 399 African American men were diagnosed with syphilis but were never informed that they had the
disease, leaving them to live with and pass on the illness to others. Doctors even withheld proven medications
because the goal of the study was to understand the impact of untreated syphilis on Black men.
While the decisions made in the Tuskegee study are unjustifiable, some decisions are genuinely difficult to make.
For example, bioethicists may examine the implications of gene editing technologies, including the ability to create
organisms that may displace others in the environment, as well as the ability to “design” human beings. In that
effort, ethicists will likely seek to balance the positive outcomes -- such as improved therapies or prevention of
certain illnesses -- with negative outcomes.
Bioethics are not simple, and often leave scientists balancing benefits with harm. In this text and course, you will
discuss medical discoveries that, at their core, have what many consider an ethical lapse. In 1951, Henrietta Lacks,
a 30-year-old African American woman, was diagnosed with cervical cancer at Johns Hopkins Hospital. Unique
characteristics of her illnesses gave her cells the ability to divide continuously, essentially making them “immortal.”
Without her knowledge or permission, researchers took samples of her cells and with them created the immortal
HeLa cell line. These cells have contributed to major medical discoveries, including the polio vaccine and work
related to cancer, AIDS, cell aging, and even very recently in COVID-19 research. For the most part, Lacks has not
been credited for her role in those discoveries, and her family has not benefited from the billions of dollars in
pharmaceutical profits obtained partly through the use of her cells.
Today, harvesting tissue or organs from a dying patient without consent is not only considered unethical but also
illegal, regardless of whether such an act could save other patients’ lives. Part of the role of ethics in scientific
research is to examine similar issues before, during, and after research or practice takes place, as well as to adhere
to established professional principles and consider the dignity and safety of all organisms involved or affected by the
work.
1.2 The Process of Science
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the shared characteristics of the natural sciences
• Understand the process of scientific inquiry
• Compare inductive reasoning with deductive reasoning
• Describe the goals of basic science and applied science
Access for free at openstax.org1.2 • The Process of Science
FIGURE 1.14 Formerly called blue-green algae, the (a) cyanobacteria seen through a light microscope are some of Earth’s oldest life forms.
These (b) stromatolites along the shores of Lake Thetis in Western Australia are ancient structures formed by the layering of cyanobacteria
in shallow waters. (credit a: modification of work by NASA; scale-bar data from Matt Russell; credit b: modification of work by Ruth Ellison)
Like geology, physics, and chemistry, biology is a science that gathers knowledge about the natural world.
Specifically, biology is the study of life. The discoveries of biology are made by a community of researchers who
work individually and together using agreed-on methods. In this sense, biology, like all sciences is a social
enterprise like politics or the arts. The methods of science include careful observation, record keeping, logical and
mathematical reasoning, experimentation, and submitting conclusions to the scrutiny of others. Science also
requires considerable imagination and creativity; a well-designed experiment is commonly described as elegant, or
beautiful. Like politics, science has considerable practical implications and some science is dedicated to practical
applications, such as the prevention of disease (see Figure 1.15). Other science proceeds largely motivated by
curiosity. Whatever its goal, there is no doubt that science, including biology, has transformed human existence and
will continue to do so.
FIGURE 1.15 Biologists may choose to study Escherichia coli (E. coli), a bacterium that is a normal resident of our digestive tracts but which
is also sometimes responsible for disease outbreaks. In this micrograph, the bacterium is visualized using a scanning electron microscope
and digital colorization. (credit: Eric Erbe; digital colorization by Christopher Pooley, USDA-ARS)
The Nature of Science
Biology is a science, but what exactly is science? What does the study of biology share with other scientific
disciplines? Science (from the Latin scientia, meaning "knowledge") can be defined as knowledge about the natural
world.
Science is a very specific way of learning, or knowing, about the world. The history of the past 500 years
demonstrates that science is a very powerful way of knowing about the world; it is largely responsible for the
1718
1 • Introduction to Biology
technological revolutions that have taken place during this time. There are however, areas of knowledge and human
experience that the methods of science cannot be applied to. These include such things as answering purely moral
questions, aesthetic questions, or what can be generally categorized as spiritual questions. Science cannot
investigate these areas because they are outside the realm of material phenomena, the phenomena of matter and
energy, and cannot be observed and measured.
The scientific method is a method of research with defined steps that include experiments and careful observation.
The steps of the scientific method will be examined in detail later, but one of the most important aspects of this
method is the testing of hypotheses. A hypothesis is a suggested explanation for an event, which can be tested.
Hypotheses, or tentative explanations, are generally produced within the context of a scientific theory. A generally
accepted scientific theory is thoroughly tested and confirmed explanation for a set of observations or phenomena.
Scientific theory is the foundation of scientific knowledge. In addition, in many scientific disciplines (less so in
biology) there are scientific laws, often expressed in mathematical formulas, which describe how elements of
nature will behave under certain specific conditions. There is not an evolution of hypotheses through theories to
laws as if they represented some increase in certainty about the world. Hypotheses are the day-to-day material that
scientists work with and they are developed within the context of theories. Laws are concise descriptions of parts of
the world that are amenable to formulaic or mathematical description.
Natural Sciences
What would you expect to see in a museum of natural sciences? Frogs? Plants? Dinosaur skeletons? Exhibits about
how the brain functions? A planetarium? Gems and minerals? Or maybe all of the above? Science includes such
diverse fields as astronomy, biology, computer sciences, geology, logic, physics, chemistry, and mathematics (Figure
1.16). However, those fields of science related to the physical world and its phenomena and processes are
considered natural sciences. Thus, a museum of natural sciences might contain any of the items listed above.
FIGURE 1.16 Some fields of science include astronomy, biology, computer science, geology, logic, physics, chemistry, and mathematics.
(credit: "Image Editor"/Flickr)
There is no complete agreement when it comes to defining what the natural sciences include. For some experts, the
natural sciences are astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth science, and physics. Other scholars choose to divide
natural sciences into life sciences, which study living things and include biology, and physical sciences, which
study nonliving matter and include astronomy, physics, and chemistry. Some disciplines such as biophysics and
biochemistry build on two sciences and are interdisciplinary.
Scientific Inquiry
One thing is common to all forms of science: an ultimate goal “to know.” Curiosity and inquiry are the driving forces
for the development of science. Scientists seek to understand the world and the way it operates. Two methods of
Access for free at openstax.org1.2 • The Process of Science
logical thinking are used: inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning.
Inductive reasoning is a form of logical thinking that uses related observations to arrive at a general conclusion.
This type of reasoning is common in descriptive science. A life scientist such as a biologist makes observations and
records them. These data can be qualitative (descriptive) or quantitative (consisting of numbers), and the raw data
can be supplemented with drawings, pictures, photos, or videos. From many observations, the scientist can infer
conclusions (inductions) based on evidence. Inductive reasoning involves formulating generalizations inferred from
careful observation and the analysis of a large amount of data. Brain studies often work this way. Many brains are
observed while people are doing a task. The part of the brain that lights up, indicating activity, is then demonstrated
to be the part controlling the response to that task.
Deductive reasoning or deduction is the type of logic used in hypothesis-based science. In deductive reasoning, the
pattern of thinking moves in the opposite direction as compared to inductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning is a
form of logical thinking that uses a general principle or law to predict specific results. From those general principles,
a scientist can deduce and predict the specific results that would be valid as long as the general principles are valid.
For example, a prediction would be that if the climate is becoming warmer in a region, the distribution of plants and
animals should change. Comparisons have been made between distributions in the past and the present, and the
many changes that have been found are consistent with a warming climate. Finding the change in distribution is
evidence that the climate change conclusion is a valid one.
Both types of logical thinking are related to the two main pathways of scientific study: descriptive science and
hypothesis-based science. Descriptive (or discovery) science aims to observe, explore, and discover, while
hypothesis-based science begins with a specific question or problem and a potential answer or solution that can be
tested. The boundary between these two forms of study is often blurred, because most scientific endeavors
combine both approaches. Observations lead to questions, questions lead to forming a hypothesis as a possible
answer to those questions, and then the hypothesis is tested. Thus, descriptive science and hypothesis-based
science are in continuous dialogue.
Hypothesis Testing
Biologists study the living world by posing questions about it and seeking science-based responses. This approach
is common to other sciences as well and is often referred to as the scientific method. The scientific method was
used even in ancient times, but it was first documented by England’s Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626) (Figure 1.17),
who set up inductive methods for scientific inquiry. The scientific method is not exclusively used by biologists but
can be applied to almost anything as a logical problem-solving method.
FIGURE 1.17 Sir Francis Bacon is credited with being the first to document the scientific method.
1920
1 • Introduction to Biology
The scientific process typically starts with an observation (often a problem to be solved) that leads to a question.
Let’s think about a simple problem that starts with an observation and apply the scientific method to solve the
problem. One Monday morning, a student arrives at class and quickly discovers that the classroom is too warm. That
is an observation that also describes a problem: the classroom is too warm. The student then asks a question: “Why
is the classroom so warm?”
Recall that a hypothesis is a suggested explanation that can be tested. To solve a problem, several hypotheses may
be proposed. For example, one hypothesis might be, “The classroom is warm because no one turned on the air
conditioning.” But there could be other responses to the question, and therefore other hypotheses may be
proposed. A second hypothesis might be, “The classroom is warm because there is a power failure, and so the air
conditioning doesn’t work.”
Once a hypothesis has been selected, a prediction may be made. A prediction is similar to a hypothesis but it
typically has the format “If . . . then . . . .” For example, the prediction for the first hypothesis might be, “If the
student turns on the air conditioning, then the classroom will no longer be too warm.”
A hypothesis must be testable to ensure that it is valid. For example, a hypothesis that depends on what a bear
thinks is not testable, because it can never be known what a bear thinks. It should also be falsifiable, meaning that
it can be disproven by experimental results. An example of an unfalsifiable hypothesis is “Botticelli’s Birth of Venus
is beautiful.” There is no experiment that might show this statement to be false. To test a hypothesis, a researcher
will conduct one or more experiments designed to eliminate one or more of the hypotheses. This is important. A
hypothesis can be disproven, or eliminated, but it can never be proven. Science does not deal in proofs like
mathematics. If an experiment fails to disprove a hypothesis, then we find support for that explanation, but this is
not to say that down the road a better explanation will not be found, or a more carefully designed experiment will be
found to falsify the hypothesis.
Each experiment will have one or more variables and one or more controls. A variable is any part of the experiment
that can vary or change during the experiment. A control is a part of the experiment that does not change. Look for
the variables and controls in the example that follows. As a simple example, an experiment might be conducted to
test the hypothesis that phosphate limits the growth of algae in freshwater ponds. A series of artificial ponds are
filled with water and half of them are treated by adding phosphate each week, while the other half are treated by
adding a salt that is known not to be used by algae. The variable here is the phosphate (or lack of phosphate), the
experimental or treatment cases are the ponds with added phosphate and the control ponds are those with
something inert added, such as the salt. Just adding something is also a control against the possibility that adding
extra matter to the pond has an effect. If the treated ponds show lesser growth of algae, then we have found
support for our hypothesis. If they do not, then we reject our hypothesis. Be aware that rejecting one hypothesis
does not determine whether or not the other hypotheses can be accepted; it simply eliminates one hypothesis that
is not valid (Figure 1.18). Using the scientific method, the hypotheses that are inconsistent with experimental data
are rejected.
In recent years a new approach of testing hypotheses has developed as a result of an exponential growth of data
deposited in various databases. Using computer algorithms and statistical analyses of data in databases, a new field
of so-called "data research" (also referred to as "in silico" research) provides new methods of data analyses and
their interpretation. This will increase the demand for specialists in both biology and computer science, a promising
career opportunity.
Access for free at openstax.org1.2 • The Process of Science
VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 1.18 The scientific method is a series of defined steps that include experiments and careful observation. If a hypothesis is not
supported by data, a new hypothesis can be proposed.
In the example below, the scientific method is used to solve an everyday problem. Which part in the example below
is the hypothesis? Which is the prediction? Based on the results of the experiment, is the hypothesis supported? If it
is not supported, propose some alternative hypotheses.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
My toaster doesn’t toast my bread.
Why doesn’t my toaster work?
There is something wrong with the electrical outlet.
If something is wrong with the outlet, my coffeemaker also won’t work when plugged into it.
I plug my coffeemaker into the outlet.
My coffeemaker works.
In practice, the scientific method is not as rigid and structured as it might at first appear. Sometimes an experiment
leads to conclusions that favor a change in approach; often, an experiment brings entirely new scientific questions
to the puzzle. Many times, science does not operate in a linear fashion; instead, scientists continually draw
inferences and make generalizations, finding patterns as their research proceeds. Scientific reasoning is more
complex than the scientific method alone suggests.
Basic and Applied Science
The scientific community has been debating for the last few decades about the value of different types of science. Is
it valuable to pursue science for the sake of simply gaining knowledge, or does scientific knowledge only have worth
2122
1 • Introduction to Biology
if we can apply it to solving a specific problem or bettering our lives? This question focuses on the differences
between two types of science: basic science and applied science.
Basic science or “pure” science seeks to expand knowledge regardless of the short-term application of that
knowledge. It is not focused on developing a product or a service of immediate public or commercial value. The
immediate goal of basic science is knowledge for knowledge’s sake, though this does not mean that in the end it
may not result in an application.
In contrast, applied science or “technology,” aims to use science to solve real-world problems, making it possible,
for example, to improve a crop yield, find a cure for a particular disease, or save animals threatened by a natural
disaster. In applied science, the problem is usually defined for the researcher.
Some individuals may perceive applied science as “useful” and basic science as “useless.” A question these people
might pose to a scientist advocating knowledge acquisition would be, “What for?” A careful look at the history of
science, however, reveals that basic knowledge has resulted in many remarkable applications of great value. Many
scientists think that a basic understanding of science is necessary before an application is developed; therefore,
applied science relies on the results generated through basic science. Other scientists think that it is time to move
on from basic science and instead to find solutions to actual problems. Both approaches are valid. It is true that
there are problems that demand immediate attention; however, few solutions would be found without the help of
the knowledge generated through basic science.
One example of how basic and applied science can work together to solve practical problems occurred after the
discovery of DNA structure led to an understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing DNA replication.
Strands of DNA, unique in every human, are found in our cells, where they provide the instructions necessary for life.
During DNA replication, new copies of DNA are made, shortly before a cell divides to form new cells. Understanding
the mechanisms of DNA replication enabled scientists to develop laboratory techniques that are now used to
identify genetic diseases, pinpoint individuals who were at a crime scene, and determine paternity. Without basic
science, it is unlikely that applied science could exist.
Another example of the link between basic and applied research is the Human Genome Project, a study in which
each human chromosome was analyzed and mapped to determine the precise sequence of DNA subunits and the
exact location of each gene. (The gene is the basic unit of heredity represented by a specific DNA segment that
codes for a functional molecule.) Other organisms have also been studied as part of this project to gain a better
understanding of human chromosomes. The Human Genome Project (Figure 1.19) relied on basic research carried
out with non-human organisms and, later, with the human genome. An important end goal eventually became using
the data for applied research seeking cures for genetically related diseases.
FIGURE 1.19 The Human Genome Project was a 13-year collaborative effort among researchers working in several different fields of
science. The project was completed in 2003. (credit: the U.S. Department of Energy Genome Programs)
While research efforts in both basic science and applied science are usually carefully planned, it is important to note
that some discoveries are made by serendipity, that is, by means of a fortunate accident or a lucky surprise.
Access for free at openstax.org1.2 • The Process of Science
Penicillin was discovered when biologist Alexander Fleming accidentally left a petri dish of Staphylococcus bacteria
open. An unwanted mold grew, killing the bacteria. The mold turned out to be Penicillium, and a new critically
important antibiotic was discovered. In a similar manner, Percy Lavon Julian was an established medicinal chemist
working on a way to mass produce compounds with which to manufacture important drugs. He was focused on
using soybean oil in the production of progesterone (a hormone important in the menstrual cycle and pregnancy),
but it wasn't until water accidentally leaked into a large soybean oil storage tank that he found his method.
Immediately recognizing the resulting substance as stigmasterol, a primary ingredient in progesterone and similar
drugs, he began the process of replicating and industrializing the process in a manner that has helped millions of
people. Even in the highly organized world of science, luck—when combined with an observant, curious mind
focused on the types of reasoning discussed above—can lead to unexpected breakthroughs.
Reporting Scientific Work
Whether scientific research is basic science or applied science, scientists must share their findings for other
researchers to expand and build upon their discoveries. Communication and collaboration within and between sub
disciplines of science are key to the advancement of knowledge in science. For this reason, an important aspect of a
scientist’s work is disseminating results and communicating with peers. Scientists can share results by presenting
them at a scientific meeting or conference, but this approach can reach only the limited few who are present.
Instead, most scientists present their results in peer-reviewed articles that are published in scientific journals.
Peer-reviewed articles are scientific papers that are reviewed, usually anonymously by a scientist’s colleagues, or
peers. These colleagues are qualified individuals, often experts in the same research area, who judge whether or not
the scientist’s work is suitable for publication. The process of peer review helps to ensure that the research
described in a scientific paper or grant proposal is original, significant, logical, and thorough. Grant proposals, which
are requests for research funding, are also subject to peer review. Scientists publish their work so other scientists
can reproduce their experiments under similar or different conditions to expand on the findings.
There are many journals and the popular press that do not use a peer-review system. A large number of online
open-access journals, journals with articles available without cost, are now available many of which use rigorous
peer-review systems, but some of which do not. Results of any studies published in these forums without peer
review are not reliable and should not form the basis for other scientific work. In one exception, journals may allow a
researcher to cite a personal communication from another researcher about unpublished results with the cited
author’s permission.
2324
1 • Key Terms
Key Terms
applied science a form of science that solves real-
world problems
atom a basic unit of matter that cannot be broken
down by normal chemical reactions
basic science science that seeks to expand
knowledge regardless of the short-term application
of that knowledge
biology the study of life
biosphere a collection of all ecosystems on Earth
cell the smallest fundamental unit of structure and
function in living things
community a set of populations inhabiting a
particular area
control a part of an experiment that does not change
during the experiment
deductive reasoning a form of logical thinking that
uses a general statement to predict specific results
descriptive science a form of science that aims to
observe, explore, and find things out
ecosystem all living things in a particular area
together with the abiotic, nonliving parts of that
environment
eukaryote an organism with cells that have nuclei
and membrane-bound organelles
evolution the process of gradual change in a
population that can also lead to new species arising
from older species
falsifiable able to be disproven by experimental
results
homeostasis the ability of an organism to maintain
constant internal conditions
hypothesis a suggested explanation for an event,
which can be tested
hypothesis-based science a form of science that
begins with a specific explanation that is then tested
inductive reasoning a form of logical thinking that
uses related observations to arrive at a general
conclusion
life science a field of science, such as biology, that
studies living things
macromolecule a large molecule typically formed by
the joining of smaller molecules
molecule a chemical structure consisting of at least
two atoms held together by a chemical bond
natural science a field of science that studies the
physical world, its phenomena, and processes
organ a structure formed of tissues operating
together to perform a common function
organ system the higher level of organization that
consists of functionally related organs
organelle a membrane-bound compartment or sac
within a cell
organism an individual living entity
peer-reviewed article a scientific report that is
reviewed by a scientist’s colleagues before
publication
phylogenetic tree a diagram showing the
evolutionary relationships among biological species
based on similarities and differences in genetic or
physical traits or both
physical science a field of science, such as
astronomy, physics, and chemistry, that studies
nonliving matter
population all individuals within a species living
within a specific area
prokaryote a unicellular organism that lacks a
nucleus or any other membrane-bound organelle
science knowledge that covers general truths or the
operation of general laws, especially when acquired
and tested by the scientific method
scientific law a description, often in the form of a
mathematical formula, for the behavior of some
aspect of nature under certain specific conditions
scientific method a method of research with defined
steps that include experiments and careful
observation
scientific theory a thoroughly tested and confirmed
explanation for observations or phenomena
tissue a group of similar cells carrying out the same
function
variable a part of an experiment that can vary or
change
Chapter Summary
1.1 Themes and Concepts of Biology
Biology is the science of life. All living organisms share
several key properties such as order, sensitivity or
response to stimuli, reproduction, adaptation, growth
and development, regulation, homeostasis, and energy
processing. Living things are highly organized following
a hierarchy that includes atoms, molecules, organelles,
cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems. Organisms, in
Access for free at openstax.org
turn, are grouped as populations, communities,
ecosystems, and the biosphere. Evolution is the source
of the tremendous biological diversity on Earth today. A
diagram called a phylogenetic tree can be used to
show evolutionary relationships among organisms.
Biology is very broad and includes many branches and
sub disciplines. Examples include molecular biology,
microbiology, neurobiology, zoology, and botany,
among others.1 • Visual Connection Questions
1.2 The Process of Science
Biology is the science that studies living organisms and
their interactions with one another and their
environments. Science attempts to describe and
understand the nature of the universe in whole or in
part. Science has many fields; those fields related to
the physical world and its phenomena are considered
natural sciences.
A hypothesis is a tentative explanation for an
observation. A generally accepted scientific theory is
thoroughly tested and confirmed explanation for a set
of observations or phenomena. A scientific law is a
description, often in the form of a mathematical
formula, of the behavior of an aspect of nature under
25
certain circumstances. Two types of logical reasoning
are used in science. Inductive reasoning uses results to
produce general scientific principles. Deductive
reasoning is a form of logical thinking that predicts
results by applying general principles. The common
thread throughout scientific research is the use of the
scientific method. Scientists present their results in
peer-reviewed scientific papers published in scientific
journals.
Science can be basic or applied. The main goal of basic
science is to expand knowledge without any
expectation of short-term practical application of that
knowledge. The primary goal of applied research,
however, is to solve practical problems.
Visual Connection Questions
1. Figure 1.8 Which of the following statements is
false?
A. Tissues exist within organs which exist within
organ systems.
B. Communities exist within populations which
exist within ecosystems.
C. Organelles exist within cells which exist within
tissues.
D. Communities exist within ecosystems which
exist in the biosphere.
2. Figure 1.18 In the example below, the scientific
method is used to solve an everyday problem.
Which part in the example below is the hypothesis?
Which is the prediction? Based on the results of the
experiment, is the hypothesis supported? If it is not
supported, propose some alternative hypotheses.
1. My toaster doesn’t toast my bread.
2. Why doesn’t my toaster work?
3. There is something wrong with the electrical
outlet.
4. If something is wrong with the outlet, my
coffeemaker also won’t work when plugged
into it.
5. I plug my coffeemaker into the outlet.
6. My coffeemaker works.
Review Questions
3. The smallest unit of biological structure that meets
the functional requirements of “living” is the
________.
a. organ
b. organelle
c. cell
d. macromolecule
4. Which of the following sequences represents the
hierarchy of biological organization from the most
complex to the least complex level?
a. organelle, tissue, biosphere, ecosystem,
population
b. organ, organism, tissue, organelle, molecule
c. organism, community, biosphere, molecule,
tissue, organ
d. biosphere, ecosystem, community, population,
organism
5. A suggested and testable explanation for an event
is called a ________.
a. hypothesis
b. variable
c. theory
d. control
6. The type of logical thinking that uses related
observations to arrive at a general conclusion is
called ________.
a. deductive reasoning
b. the scientific method
c. hypothesis-based science
d. inductive reasoning26
1 • Critical Thinking Questions
Critical Thinking Questions
7. Using examples, explain how biology can be studied
from a microscopic approach to a global approach.
Access for free at openstax.org
8. Give an example of how applied science has had a
direct effect on your daily life.CHAPTER 2
Chemistry of Life
FIGURE 2.1 Foods such as bread, fruit, and cheese are rich sources of biological macromolecules. (credit:
modification of work by Bengt Nyman)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1 The Building Blocks of Molecules
2.2 Water
2.3 Biological Molecules
INTRODUCTION The elements carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus are
the key building blocks of the chemicals found in living things. They form the carbohydrates,
nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids (all of which will be defined later in this chapter) that are the
fundamental molecular components of all organisms. In this chapter, we will discuss these
important building blocks and learn how the unique properties of the atoms of different elements
affect their interactions with other atoms to form the molecules of life.
Food provides an organism with nutrients—the matter it needs to survive. Many of these critical
nutrients come in the form of biological macromolecules, or large molecules necessary for life.
These macromolecules are built from different combinations of smaller organic molecules. What
specific types of biological macromolecules do living things require? How are these molecules
formed? What functions do they serve? In this chapter, we will explore these questions.28
2 • Chemistry of Life
2.1 The Building Blocks of Molecules
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe matter and elements
• Describe the interrelationship between protons, neutrons, and electrons, and the ways in
which electrons can be donated or shared between atoms
At its most fundamental level, life is made up of matter. Matter occupies space and has mass. All
matter is composed of elements, substances that cannot be broken down or transformed
chemically into other substances. Each element is made of atoms, each with a constant number of
protons and unique properties. A total of 118 elements have been defined; however, only 92 occur
naturally, and fewer than 30 are found in living cells. The remaining 26 elements are unstable and,
therefore, do not exist for very long or are theoretical and have yet to be detected.
Each element is designated by its chemical symbol (such as H, N, O, C, and Na), and possesses
unique properties. These unique properties allow elements to combine and to bond with each
other in specific ways.
Atoms
An atom is the smallest component of an element that retains all of the chemical properties of
that element. For example, one hydrogen atom has all of the properties of the element hydrogen,
such as it exists as a gas at room temperature, and it bonds with oxygen to create a water
molecule. Hydrogen atoms cannot be broken down into anything smaller while still retaining the
properties of hydrogen. If a hydrogen atom were broken down into subatomic particles, it would
no longer have the properties of hydrogen.
At the most basic level, all organisms are made of a combination of elements. They contain atoms
that combine together to form molecules. In multicellular organisms, such as animals, molecules
can interact to form cells that combine to form tissues, which make up organs. These
combinations continue until entire multicellular organisms are formed.
All atoms contain protons, electrons, and neutrons (Figure 2.2). The most common isotope of
hydrogen (H) is the only exception and is made of one proton and one electron with no neutrons. A
proton is a positively charged particle that resides in the nucleus (the core of the atom) of an atom
and has a mass of 1 and a charge of +1. An electron is a negatively charged particle that travels in
the space around the nucleus. In other words, it resides outside of the nucleus. It has a negligible
mass and has a charge of –1.
FIGURE 2.2 Atoms are made up of protons and neutrons located within the nucleus, and electrons surrounding the
nucleus.
Neutrons, like protons, reside in the nucleus of an atom. They have a mass of 1 and no charge.
The positive (protons) and negative (electrons) charges balance each other in a neutral atom,
which has a net zero charge.
Access for free at openstax.org2.1 • The Building Blocks of Molecules
Because protons and neutrons each have a mass of 1, the mass of an atom is equal to the number of protons and
neutrons of that atom. The number of electrons does not factor into the overall mass, because their mass is so
small.
As stated earlier, each element has its own unique properties. Each contains a different number of protons and
neutrons, giving it its own atomic number and mass number. The atomic number of an element is equal to the
number of protons that element contains. The mass number, or atomic mass, is the number of protons plus the
number of neutrons of that element. Therefore, it is possible to determine the number of neutrons by subtracting
the atomic number from the mass number.
These numbers provide information about the elements and how they will react when combined. Different elements
have different melting and boiling points, and are in different states (liquid, solid, or gas) at room temperature. They
also combine in different ways. Some form specific types of bonds, whereas others do not. How they combine is
based on the number of electrons present. Because of these characteristics, the elements are arranged into the
periodic table of elements, a chart of the elements that includes the atomic number and relative atomic mass of
each element. The periodic table also provides key information about the properties of elements (Figure 2.2)—often
indicated by color-coding. The arrangement of the table also shows how the electrons in each element are
organized and provides important details about how atoms will react with each other to form molecules.
Isotopes are different forms of the same element that have the same number of protons, but a different number of
neutrons. Some elements, such as carbon, potassium, and uranium, have naturally occurring isotopes. Carbon-12,
the most common isotope of carbon, contains six protons and six neutrons. Therefore, it has a mass number of 12
(six protons and six neutrons) and an atomic number of 6 (which makes it carbon). Carbon-14 contains six protons
and eight neutrons. Therefore, it has a mass number of 14 (six protons and eight neutrons) and an atomic number of
6, meaning it is still the element carbon. These two alternate forms of carbon are isotopes. Some isotopes are
unstable and will lose protons, other subatomic particles, or energy to form more stable elements. These are called
radioactive isotopes or radioisotopes.
2930
2 • Chemistry of Life
VISUAL CONNECTION
FIGURE 2.3 Arranged in columns and rows based on the characteristics of the elements, the periodic table provides key information about
the elements and how they might interact with each other to form molecules. Most periodic tables provide a key or legend to the
information they contain.
How many neutrons do (K) potassium-39 and potassium-40 have, respectively?
EVOLUTION CONNECTION
Carbon Dating
Carbon-14 (14C) is a naturally occurring radioisotope that is created in the atmosphere by cosmic rays. This is a
continuous process, so more 14C is always being created. As a living organism develops, the relative level of 14C in
its body is equal to the concentration of 14C in the atmosphere. When an organism dies, it is no longer ingesting 14C,
so the ratio will decline. 14C decays to 14N by a process called beta decay; it gives off energy in this slow process.
After approximately 5,730 years, only one-half of the starting concentration of 14C will have been converted to 14N.
The time it takes for half of the original concentration of an isotope to decay to its more stable form is called its half-
life. Because the half-life of 14C is long, it is used to age formerly living objects, such as fossils. Using the ratio of the
14C concentration found in an object to the amount of 14C detected in the atmosphere, the amount of the isotope
that has not yet decayed can be determined. Based on this amount, the age of the fossil can be calculated to about
50,000 years (Figure 2.4). Isotopes with longer half-lives, such as potassium-40, are used to calculate the ages of
older fossils. Through the use of carbon dating, scientists can reconstruct the ecology and biogeography of
organisms living within the past 50,000 years.
Access for free at openstax.org2.1 • The Building Blocks of Molecules
FIGURE 2.4 The age of remains that contain carbon and are less than about 50,000 years old, such as this pygmy mammoth, can be
determined using carbon dating. (credit: Bill Faulkner/NPS)
LINK TO LEARNING
To learn more about atoms and isotopes, and how you can tell one isotope from another, visit this site
(http://openstax.org/l/isotopes) and run the simulation.
Chemical Bonds
How elements interact with one another depends on how their electrons are arranged and how many openings for
electrons exist at the outermost region where electrons are present in an atom. Electrons exist at energy levels that
form shells around the nucleus. The closest shell can hold up to two electrons. The closest shell to the nucleus is
always filled first, before any other shell can be filled. Hydrogen has one electron; therefore, it has only one spot
occupied within the lowest shell. Helium has two electrons; therefore, it can completely fill the lowest shell with its
two electrons. If you look at the periodic table, you will see that hydrogen and helium are the only two elements in
the first row. This is because they only have electrons in their first shell. Hydrogen and helium are the only two
elements that have the lowest shell and no other shells.
The second and third energy levels can hold up to eight electrons. The eight electrons are arranged in four pairs and
one position in each pair is filled with an electron before any pairs are completed.
Looking at the periodic table again (Figure 2.3), you will notice that there are seven rows. These rows correspond to
the number of shells that the elements within that row have. The elements within a particular row have increasing
numbers of electrons as the columns proceed from left to right. Although each element has the same number of
shells, not all of the shells are completely filled with electrons. If you look at the second row of the periodic table,
you will find lithium (Li), beryllium (Be), boron (B), carbon (C), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), fluorine (F), and neon (Ne).
These all have electrons that occupy only the first and second shells. Lithium has only one electron in its outermost
shell, beryllium has two electrons, boron has three, and so on, until the entire shell is filled with eight electrons, as is
the case with neon.
Not all elements have enough electrons to fill their outermost shells, but an atom is at its most stable when all of the
electron positions in the outermost shell are filled. Because of these vacancies in the outermost shells, we see the
formation of chemical bonds, or interactions between two or more of the same or different elements that result in
the formation of molecules. To achieve greater stability, atoms will tend to completely fill their outer shells and will
bond with other elements to accomplish this goal by sharing electrons, accepting electrons from another atom, or
donating electrons to another atom. Because the outermost shells of the elements with low atomic numbers (up to
3132
2 • Chemistry of Life
calcium, with atomic number 20) can hold eight electrons, this is referred to as the octet rule. An element can
donate, accept, or share electrons with other elements to fill its outer shell and satisfy the octet rule.
When an atom does not contain equal numbers of protons and electrons, it is called an ion. Because the number of
electrons does not equal the number of protons, each ion has a net charge. Positive ions are formed by losing
electrons and are called cations. Negative ions are formed by gaining electrons and are called anions.
For example, sodium only has one electron in its outermost shell. It takes less energy for sodium to donate that one
electron than it does to accept seven more electrons to fill the outer shell. If sodium loses an electron, it now has 11
protons and only 10 electrons, leaving it with an overall charge of +1. It is now called a sodium ion.
The chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer shell. Again, it is more energy-efficient for chlorine to gain one
electron than to lose seven. Therefore, it tends to gain an electron to create an ion with 17 protons and 18 electrons,
giving it a net negative (–1) charge. It is now called a chloride ion. This movement of electrons from one element to
another is referred to as electron transfer. As Figure 2.5 illustrates, a sodium atom (Na) only has one electron in its
outermost shell, whereas a chlorine atom (Cl) has seven electrons in its outermost shell. A sodium atom will donate
its one electron to empty its shell, and a chlorine atom will accept that electron to fill its shell, becoming chloride.
Both ions now satisfy the octet rule and have complete outermost shells. Because the number of electrons is no
longer equal to the number of protons, each is now an ion and has a +1 (sodium) or –1 (chloride) charge.
FIGURE 2.5 Elements tend to fill their outermost shells with electrons. To do this, they can either donate or accept electrons from other
elements.
Ionic Bonds
There are four types of bonds or interactions: ionic, covalent, hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals interactions. Ionic
and covalent bonds are strong interactions that require a larger energy input to break apart. When an element
donates an electron from its outer shell, as in the sodium atom example above, a positive ion is formed. The
element accepting the electron is now negatively charged. Because positive and negative charges attract, these ions
stay together and form an ionic bond, or a bond between ions. The elements bond together with the electron from
one element staying predominantly with the other element. When Na+ and Cl– ions combine to produce NaCl, an
electron from a sodium atom stays with the other seven from the chlorine atom, and the sodium and chloride ions
attract each other in a lattice of ions with a net zero charge.
Covalent Bonds
Another type of strong chemical bond between two or more atoms is a covalent bond. These bonds form when an
electron is shared between two elements and are the strongest and most common form of chemical bond in living
organisms. Covalent bonds form between the elements that make up the biological molecules in our cells. Unlike
Access for free at openstax.org2.1 • The Building Blocks of Molecules
ionic bonds, covalent bonds do not dissociate in water.
The hydrogen and oxygen atoms that combine to form water molecules are bound together by covalent bonds. The
electron from the hydrogen atom divides its time between the outer shell of the hydrogen atom and the incomplete
outer shell of the oxygen atom. To completely fill the outer shell of an oxygen atom, two electrons from two
hydrogen atoms are needed, hence the subscript “2” in H2O. The electrons are shared between the atoms, dividing
their time between them to “fill” the outer shell of each. This sharing is a lower energy state for all of the atoms
involved than if they existed without their outer shells filled.
There are two types of covalent bonds: polar and nonpolar. Nonpolar covalent bonds form between two atoms of
the same element or between different elements that share the electrons equally. For example, an oxygen atom can
bond with another oxygen atom to fill their outer shells. This association is nonpolar because the electrons will be
equally distributed between each oxygen atom. Two covalent bonds form between the two oxygen atoms because
oxygen requires two shared electrons to fill its outermost shell. Nitrogen atoms will form three covalent bonds (also
called triple covalent) between two atoms of nitrogen because each nitrogen atom needs three electrons to fill its
outermost shell. Another example of a nonpolar covalent bond is found in the methane (CH4) molecule. The carbon
atom has four electrons in its outermost shell and needs four more to fill it. It gets these four from four hydrogen
atoms, each atom providing one. These elements all share the electrons equally, creating four nonpolar covalent
bonds (Figure 2.6).
In a polar covalent bond, the electrons shared by the atoms spend more time closer to one nucleus than to the
other nucleus. Because of the unequal distribution of electrons between the different nuclei, a slightly positive (δ+)
or slightly negative (δ–) charge develops. The covalent bonds between hydrogen and oxygen atoms in water are
polar covalent bonds. The shared electrons spend more time near the oxygen nucleus, giving it a small negative
charge, than they spend near the hydrogen nuclei, giving these molecules a small positive charge.
FIGURE 2.6 The water molecule (left) depicts a polar bond with a slightly positive charge on the hydrogen atoms and a slightly negative
charge on the oxygen. Examples of nonpolar bonds include methane (middle) and oxygen (right).
Hydrogen Bonds
Ionic and covalent bonds are strong bonds that require considerable energy to break. However, not all bonds
between elements are ionic or covalent bonds. Weaker bonds can also form. These are attractions that occur
between positive and negative charges that do not require much energy to break. Two weak bonds that occur
frequently are hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions. These bonds give rise to the unique properties of
water and the unique structures of DNA and proteins.
When polar covalent bonds containing a hydrogen atom form, the hydrogen atom in that bond has a slightly positive
charge. This is because the shared electron is pulled more strongly toward the other element and away from the
hydrogen nucleus. Because the hydrogen atom is slightly positive (δ+), it will be attracted to neighboring negative
partial charges (δ–). When this happens, a weak interaction occurs between the δ+ charge of the hydrogen atom of
one molecule and the δ– charge of the other molecule. This interaction is called a hydrogen bond. This type of bond
is common; for example, the liquid nature of water is caused by the hydrogen bonds between water molecules
(Figure 2.7). Hydrogen bonds give water the unique properties that sustain life. If it were not for hydrogen bonding,
3334
2 • Chemistry of Life
water would be a gas rather than a liquid at room temperature.
FIGURE 2.7 Hydrogen bonds form between slightly positive (δ+) and slightly negative (δ–) charges of polar covalent molecules, such as
water.
Hydrogen bonds can form between different molecules and they do not always have to include a water molecule.
Hydrogen atoms in polar bonds within any molecule can form bonds with other adjacent molecules. For example,
hydrogen bonds hold together two long strands of DNA to give the DNA molecule its characteristic double-stranded
structure. Hydrogen bonds are also responsible for some of the three-dimensional structure of proteins.
van der Waals Interactions
Like hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions are weak attractions or interactions between molecules. They
occur between polar, covalently bound, atoms in different molecules. Some of these weak attractions are caused by
temporary partial charges formed when electrons move around a nucleus. These weak interactions between
molecules are important in biological systems.
CAREER CONNECTION
Radiography Technician
Have you or anyone you know ever had a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, a mammogram, or an X-ray?
These tests produce images of your soft tissues and organs (as with an MRI or mammogram) or your bones (as
happens in an X-ray) by using either radiowaves or special isotopes (radiolabeled or fluorescently labeled) that are
ingested or injected into the body. These tests provide data for disease diagnoses by creating images of your organs
or skeletal system.
MRI imaging works by subjecting hydrogen nuclei, which are abundant in the water in soft tissues, to fluctuating
magnetic fields, which cause them to emit their own magnetic field. This signal is then read by sensors in the
machine and interpreted by a computer to form a detailed image.
Some radiography technologists and technicians specialize in computed tomography, MRI, and mammography. They
produce films or images of the body that help medical professionals examine and diagnose. Radiologists work
directly with patients, explaining machinery, preparing them for exams, and ensuring that their body or body parts
are positioned correctly to produce the needed images. Physicians or radiologists then analyze the test results.
Radiography technicians can work in hospitals, doctors’ offices, or specialized imaging centers. Training to become a
radiography technician happens at hospitals, colleges, and universities that offer certificates, associate’s degrees, or
bachelor’s degrees in radiography.
2.2 Water
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the properties of water that are critical to maintaining life
Do you ever wonder why scientists spend time looking for water on other planets? It is because water is essential to
life; even minute traces of it on another planet can indicate that life could or did exist on that planet. Water is one of
Access for free at openstax.org2.2 • Water
the more abundant molecules in living cells and the one most critical to life as we know it. Approximately 60–70
percent of your body is made up of water. Without it, life simply would not exist.
Water Is Polar
The hydrogen and oxygen atoms within water molecules form polar covalent bonds. The shared electrons spend
more time associated with the oxygen atom than they do with hydrogen atoms. There is no overall charge to a water
molecule, but there is a slight positive charge on each hydrogen atom and a slight negative charge on the oxygen
atom. Because of these charges, the slightly positive hydrogen atoms repel each other and form the unique shape
seen in Figure 2.7. Each water molecule attracts other water molecules because of the positive and negative
charges in the different parts of the molecule. Water also attracts other polar molecules (such as sugars), forming
hydrogen bonds. When a substance readily forms hydrogen bonds with water, it can dissolve in water and is referred
to as hydrophilic (“water-loving”). Hydrogen bonds are not readily formed with nonpolar substances like oils and
fats (Figure 2.8). These nonpolar compounds are hydrophobic (“water-fearing”) and will not dissolve in water.
FIGURE 2.8 As this macroscopic image of oil and water show, oil is a nonpolar compound and, hence, will not dissolve in water. Oil and
water do not mix. (credit: Gautam Dogra)
Water Stabilizes Temperature
The hydrogen bonds in water allow it to absorb and release heat energy more slowly than many other substances.
Temperature is a measure of the motion (kinetic energy) of molecules. As the motion increases, energy is higher
and thus temperature is higher. Water absorbs a great deal of energy before its temperature rises. Increased energy
disrupts the hydrogen bonds between water molecules. Because these bonds can be created and disrupted rapidly,
water absorbs an increase in energy and temperature changes only minimally. This means that water moderates
temperature changes within organisms and in their environments. As energy input continues, the balance between
hydrogen-bond formation and destruction swings toward the destruction side. More bonds are broken than are
formed. This process results in the release of individual water molecules at the surface of the liquid (such as a body
of water, the leaves of a plant, or the skin of an organism) in a process called evaporation. Evaporation of sweat,
which is 90 percent water, allows for cooling of an organism, because breaking hydrogen bonds requires an input of
energy and takes heat away from the body.
Conversely, as molecular motion decreases and temperatures drop, less energy is present to break the hydrogen
bonds between water molecules. These bonds remain intact and begin to form a rigid, lattice-like structure (e.g.,
ice) (Figure 2.9a). When frozen, ice is less dense than liquid water (the molecules are farther apart). This means that
ice floats on the surface of a body of water (Figure 2.9b). In lakes, ponds, and oceans, ice will form on the surface of
the water, creating an insulating barrier to protect the animal and plant life beneath from freezing in the water. If this
did not happen, plants and animals living in water would freeze in a block of ice and could not move freely, making
life in cold temperatures difficult or impossible.
3536
2 • Chemistry of Life
FIGURE 2.9 (a) The lattice structure of ice makes it less dense than the freely flowing molecules of liquid water. Ice's lower density enables
it to (b) float on water. (credit a: modification of work by Jane Whitney; credit b: modification of work by Carlos Ponte)
LINK TO LEARNING
Click here (http://openstax.org/l/ice_lattice) to see a 3-D animation of the structure of an ice lattice.
Water Is an Excellent Solvent
Because water is polar, with slight positive and negative charges, ionic compounds and polar molecules can readily
dissolve in it. Water is, therefore, what is referred to as a solvent—a substance capable of dissolving another
substance. The charged particles will form hydrogen bonds with a surrounding layer of water molecules. This is
referred to as a sphere of hydration and serves to keep the particles separated or dispersed in the water. In the case
of table salt (NaCl) mixed in water (Figure 2.10), the sodium and chloride ions separate, or dissociate, in the water,
and spheres of hydration are formed around the ions. A positively charged sodium ion is surrounded by the partially
negative charges of oxygen atoms in water molecules. A negatively charged chloride ion is surrounded by the
partially positive charges of hydrogen atoms in water molecules. These spheres of hydration are also referred to as
hydration shells. The polarity of the water molecule makes it an effective solvent and is important in its many roles
in living systems.
FIGURE 2.10 When table salt (NaCl) is mixed in water, spheres of hydration form around the ions.
Access for free at openstax.org2.2 • Water
Water Is Cohesive
Have you ever filled up a glass of water to the very top and then slowly added a few more drops? Before it overflows,
the water actually forms a dome-like shape above the rim of the glass. This water can stay above the glass because
of the property of cohesion. In cohesion, water molecules are attracted to each other (because of hydrogen
bonding), keeping the molecules together at the liquid-air (gas) interface, although there is no more room in the
glass. Cohesion gives rise to surface tension, the capacity of a substance to withstand rupture when placed under
tension or stress. When you drop a small scrap of paper onto a droplet of water, the paper floats on top of the water
droplet, although the object is denser (heavier) than the water. This occurs because of the surface tension that is
created by the water molecules. Cohesion and surface tension keep the water molecules intact and the item floating
on the top. It is even possible to “float” a steel needle on top of a glass of water if you place it gently, without
breaking the surface tension (Figure 2.11).
FIGURE 2.11 The weight of a needle on top of water pulls the surface tension downward; at the same time, the surface tension of the water
is pulling it up, suspending the needle on the surface of the water and keeping it from sinking. Notice the indentation in the water around
the needle. (credit: Cory Zanker)
These cohesive forces are also related to the water’s property of adhesion, or the attraction between water
molecules and other molecules. This is observed when water “climbs” up a straw placed in a glass of water. You will
notice that the water appears to be higher on the sides of the straw than in the middle. This is because the water
molecules are attracted to the straw and therefore adhere to it.
Cohesive and adhesive forces are important for sustaining life. For example, because of these forces, water can flow
up from the roots to the tops of plants to feed the plant.
LINK TO LEARNING
To learn more about water, visit the U.S. Geological Survey Water Science for Schools: All About Water! website.
(http://openstax.org/l/about_water)
Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
The pH of a solution is a measure of its acidity or bascicity. You have probably used litmus paper, paper that has
been treated with a natural water-soluble dye so it can be used as a pH indicator, to test how much acid or base
(basicity) exists in a solution. You might have even used some to make sure the water in an outdoor swimming pool
is properly treated. In both cases, this pH test measures the amount of hydrogen ions that exists in a given solution.
High concentrations of hydrogen ions yield a low pH, whereas low levels of hydrogen ions result in a high pH. The
overall concentration of hydrogen ions is inversely related to its pH and can be measured on the pH scale (Figure
2.12). Therefore, the more hydrogen ions present, the lower the pH; conversely, the fewer hydrogen ions, the higher
the pH.
The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14. A change of one unit on the pH scale represents a change in the concentration of
hydrogen ions by a factor of 10, a change in two units represents a change in the concentration of hydrogen ions by
a factor of 100. Thus, small changes in pH represent large changes in the concentrations of hydrogen ions. Pure
3738
2 • Chemistry of Life
water is neutral. It is neither acidic nor basic, and has a pH of 7.0. Anything below 7.0 (ranging from 0.0 to 6.9) is
acidic, and anything above 7.0 (from 7.1 to 14.0) is alkaline. The blood in your veins is slightly alkaline (pH = 7.4).
The environment in your stomach is highly acidic (pH = 1 to 2). Orange juice is mildly acidic (pH = approximately
3.5), whereas baking soda is basic (pH = 9.0).
FIGURE 2.12 The pH scale measures the amount of hydrogen ions (H+) in a substance. (credit: modification of work by Edward Stevens)
Acids are substances that provide hydrogen ions (H+) and lower pH, whereas bases provide hydroxide ions (OH–)
and raise pH. The stronger the acid, the more readily it donates H+. For example, hydrochloric acid and lemon juice
are very acidic and readily give up H+ when added to water. Conversely, bases are those substances that readily
donate OH–. The OH– ions combine with H+ to produce water, which raises a substance’s pH. Sodium hydroxide and
many household cleaners are very alkaline and give up OH– rapidly when placed in water, thereby raising the pH.
Most cells in our bodies operate within a very narrow window of the pH scale, typically ranging only from 7.2 to 7.6.
If the pH of the body is outside of this range, the respiratory system malfunctions, as do other organs in the body.
Cells no longer function properly, and proteins will break down. Deviation outside of the pH range can induce coma
or even cause death.
So how is it that we can ingest or inhale acidic or basic substances and not die? Buffers are the key. Buffers readily
absorb excess H+ or OH–, keeping the pH of the body carefully maintained in the aforementioned narrow range.
Carbon dioxide is part of a prominent buffer system in the human body; it keeps the pH within the proper range. This
buffer system involves carbonic acid (H2CO3) and bicarbonate (HCO3–) anion. If too much H+ enters the body,
bicarbonate will combine with the H+ to create carbonic acid and limit the decrease in pH. Likewise, if too much OH–
is introduced into the system, carbonic acid will rapidly dissociate into bicarbonate and H+ ions. The H+ ions can
combine with the OH– ions, limiting the increase in pH. While carbonic acid is an important product in this reaction,
its presence is fleeting because the carbonic acid is released from the body as carbon dioxide gas each time we
breathe. Without this buffer system, the pH in our bodies would fluctuate too much and we would fail to survive.
Access for free at openstax.org2.3 • Biological Molecules
2.3 Biological Molecules
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the ways in which carbon is critical to life
• Explain the impact of slight changes in amino acids on organisms
• Describe the four major types of biological molecules
• Understand the functions of the four major types of molecules
The large molecules necessary for life that are built from smaller organic molecules are called biological
macromolecules. There are four major classes of biological macromolecules (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and
nucleic acids), and each is an important component of the cell and performs a wide array of functions. Combined,
these molecules make up the majority of a cell’s dry mass. Biological macromolecules are organic, meaning they
contain carbon and are bound to hydrogen, and may contain oxygen, nitrogen, and additional minor elements.
Carbon
It is often said that life is “carbon-based.” This means that carbon atoms, bonded to other carbon atoms or other
elements, form the fundamental components of many, if not most, of the molecules found uniquely in living things.
Other elements play important roles in biological molecules, but carbon certainly qualifies as the “foundation”
element for molecules in living things. It is the bonding properties of carbon atoms that are responsible for its
important role.
Carbon Bonding
Carbon contains four electrons in its outer shell. Therefore, it can form four covalent bonds with other atoms or
molecules. The simplest organic carbon molecule is methane (CH4), in which four hydrogen atoms bind to a carbon
atom (Figure 2.13).
FIGURE 2.13 Carbon can form four covalent bonds to create an organic molecule. The simplest carbon molecule is methane (CH4),
depicted here.
However, structures that are more complex are made using carbon. Any of the hydrogen atoms can be replaced with
another carbon atom covalently bonded to the first carbon atom. In this way, long and branching chains of carbon
compounds can be made (Figure 2.14a). The carbon atoms may bond with atoms of other elements, such as
nitrogen, oxygen, and phosphorus (Figure 2.14b). The molecules may also form rings, which themselves can link
with other rings (Figure 2.14c). This diversity of molecular forms accounts for the diversity of functions of the
biological macromolecules and is based to a large degree on the ability of carbon to form multiple bonds with itself
and other atoms.
3940
2 • Chemistry of Life
FIGURE 2.14 These examples show three molecules (found in living organisms) that contain carbon atoms bonded in various ways to other
carbon atoms and the atoms of other elements. (a) This molecule of stearic acid has a long chain of carbon atoms. (b) Glycine, a component
of proteins, contains carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms. (c) Glucose, a sugar, has a ring of carbon atoms and one oxygen atom.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are macromolecules with which most consumers are somewhat familiar. To lose weight, some
individuals adhere to “low-carb” diets. Athletes, in contrast, often “carb-load” before important competitions to
ensure that they have sufficient energy to compete at a high level. Carbohydrates are, in fact, an essential part of our
diet; grains, fruits, and vegetables are all natural sources of carbohydrates. Carbohydrates provide energy to the
body, particularly through glucose, a simple sugar. Carbohydrates also have other important functions in humans,
animals, and plants.
Carbohydrates can be represented by the formula (CH2O)n, where n is the number of carbon atoms in the molecule.
In other words, the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen is 1:2:1 in carbohydrate molecules. Carbohydrates are
classified into three subtypes: monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides (mono- = “one”; sacchar- = “sweet”) are simple sugars, the most common of which is glucose. In
monosaccharides, the number of carbon atoms usually ranges from three to six. Most monosaccharide names end
with the suffix -ose. Depending on the number of carbon atoms in the sugar, they may be known as trioses (three
carbon atoms), pentoses (five carbon atoms), and hexoses (six carbon atoms).
Monosaccharides may exist as a linear chain or as ring-shaped molecules; in aqueous solutions, they are usually
found in the ring form.
The chemical formula for glucose is C6H12O6. In most living species, glucose is an important source of energy.
During cellular respiration, energy is released from glucose, and that energy is used to help make adenosine
triphosphate (ATP). Plants synthesize glucose using carbon dioxide and water by the process of photosynthesis, and
the glucose, in turn, is used for the energy requirements of the plant. The excess synthesized glucose is often stored
as starch that is broken down by other organisms that feed on plants.
Galactose (part of lactose, or milk sugar) and fructose (found in fruit) are other common monosaccharides. Although
glucose, galactose, and fructose all have the same chemical formula (C6H12O6), they differ structurally and
chemically (and are known as isomers) because of differing arrangements of atoms in the carbon chain (Figure
2.15).
Access for free at openstax.org2.3 • Biological Molecules
FIGURE 2.15 Glucose, galactose, and fructose are isomeric monosaccharides, meaning that they have the same chemical formula but
slightly different structures.
Disaccharides (di- = “two”) form when two monosaccharides undergo a dehydration reaction (a reaction in which
the removal of a water molecule occurs). During this process, the hydroxyl group (–OH) of one monosaccharide
combines with a hydrogen atom of another monosaccharide, releasing a molecule of water (H2O) and forming a
covalent bond between atoms in the two sugar molecules.
Common disaccharides include lactose, maltose, and sucrose. Lactose is a disaccharide consisting of the monomers
glucose and galactose. It is found naturally in milk. Maltose, or malt sugar, is a disaccharide formed from a
dehydration reaction between two glucose molecules. The most common disaccharide is sucrose, or table sugar,
which is composed of the monomers glucose and fructose.
A long chain of monosaccharides linked by covalent bonds is known as a polysaccharide (poly- = “many”). The
chain may be branched or unbranched, and it may contain different types of monosaccharides. Polysaccharides may
be very large molecules. Starch, glycogen, cellulose, and chitin are examples of polysaccharides.
Starch is the stored form of sugars in plants and is made up of amylose and amylopectin (both polymers of glucose).
Plants are able to synthesize glucose, and the excess glucose is stored as starch in different plant parts, including
roots and seeds. The starch that is consumed by animals is broken down into smaller molecules, such as glucose.
The cells can then absorb the glucose.
Glycogen is the storage form of glucose in humans and other vertebrates, and is made up of monomers of glucose.
Glycogen is the animal equivalent of starch and is a highly branched molecule usually stored in liver and muscle
cells. Whenever glucose levels decrease, glycogen is broken down to release glucose.
Cellulose is one of the most abundant natural biopolymers. The cell walls of plants are mostly made of cellulose,
which provides structural support to the cell. Wood and paper are mostly cellulosic in nature. Cellulose is made up
of glucose monomers that are linked by bonds between particular carbon atoms in the glucose molecule.
Every other glucose monomer in cellulose is flipped over and packed tightly as extended long chains. This gives
cellulose its rigidity and high tensile strength—which is so important to plant cells. Cellulose passing through our
digestive system is called dietary fiber. While the glucose-glucose bonds in cellulose cannot be broken down by
human digestive enzymes, herbivores such as cows, buffalos, and horses are able to digest grass that is rich in
cellulose and use it as a food source. In these animals, certain species of bacteria reside in the digestive system of
herbivores and secrete the enzyme cellulase. The appendix also contains bacteria that break down cellulose, giving
it an important role in the digestive systems of some ruminants. Cellulases can break down cellulose into glucose
monomers that can be used as an energy source by the animal.
Carbohydrates serve other functions in different animals. Arthropods, such as insects, spiders, and crabs, have an
outer skeleton, called the exoskeleton, which protects their internal body parts. This exoskeleton is made of the
4142
2 • Chemistry of Life
biological macromolecule chitin, which is a nitrogenous carbohydrate. It is made of repeating units of a modified
sugar containing nitrogen.
Thus, through differences in molecular structure, carbohydrates are able to serve the very different functions of
energy storage (starch and glycogen) and structural support and protection (cellulose and chitin) (Figure 2.16).
FIGURE 2.16 Although their structures and functions differ, all polysaccharide carbohydrates are made up of monosaccharides and have
the chemical formula (CH2O)n.
CAREER CONNECTION
Registered Dietitian
Obesity is a worldwide health concern, and many diseases, such as diabetes and heart disease, are becoming more
prevalent because of obesity. This is one of the reasons why registered dietitians are increasingly sought after for
advice. Registered dietitians help plan food and nutrition programs for individuals in various settings. They often
work with patients in health-care facilities, designing nutrition plans to prevent and treat diseases. For example,
dietitians may teach a patient with diabetes how to manage blood-sugar levels by eating the correct types and
amounts of carbohydrates. Dietitians may also work in nursing homes, schools, and private practices.
To become a registered dietitian, one needs to earn at least a bachelor’s degree in dietetics, nutrition, food
technology, or a related field. In addition, registered dietitians must complete a supervised internship program and
pass a national exam. Those who pursue careers in dietetics take courses in nutrition, chemistry, biochemistry,
biology, microbiology, and human physiology. Dietitians must become experts in the chemistry and functions of food
(proteins, carbohydrates, and fats).
Lipids
Lipids include a diverse group of compounds that are united by a common feature. Lipids are hydrophobic (“water-
fearing”), or insoluble in water, because they are nonpolar molecules. This is because they are hydrocarbons that
include only nonpolar carbon-carbon or carbon-hydrogen bonds. Lipids perform many different functions in a cell.
Cells store energy for long-term use in the form of lipids called fats. Lipids also provide insulation from the
environment for plants and animals (Figure 2.17). For example, they help keep aquatic birds and mammals dry
because of their water-repelling nature. Lipids are also the building blocks of many hormones and are an important
Access for free at openstax.org2.3 • Biological Molecules
constituent of the plasma membrane. Lipids include fats, oils, waxes, phospholipids, and steroids.
FIGURE 2.17 Hydrophobic lipids in the fur of aquatic mammals, such as this river otter, protect them from the elements. (credit: Ken
Bosma)
A fat molecule, such as a triglyceride, consists of two main components—glycerol and fatty acids. Glycerol is an
organic compound with three carbon atoms, five hydrogen atoms, and three hydroxyl (–OH) groups. Fatty acids have
a long chain of hydrocarbons to which an acidic carboxyl group is attached, hence the name “fatty acid.” The
number of carbons in the fatty acid may range from 4 to 36; most common are those containing 12–18 carbons. In a
fat molecule, a fatty acid is attached to each of the three oxygen atoms in the –OH groups of the glycerol molecule
with a covalent bond (Figure 2.18).
FIGURE 2.18 Lipids include fats, such as triglycerides, which are made up of fatty acids and glycerol, phospholipids, and steroids.
During this covalent bond formation, three water molecules are released. The three fatty acids in the fat may be
similar or dissimilar. These fats are also called triglycerides because they have three fatty acids. Some fatty acids
4344
2 • Chemistry of Life
have common names that specify their origin. For example, palmitic acid, a saturated fatty acid, is derived from the
palm tree. Arachidic acid is derived from Arachis hypogaea, the scientific name for peanuts.
Fatty acids may be saturated or unsaturated. In a fatty acid chain, if there are only single bonds between
neighboring carbons in the hydrocarbon chain, the fatty acid is saturated. Saturated fatty acids are saturated with
hydrogen; in other words, the number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon skeleton is maximized.
When the hydrocarbon chain contains a double bond, the fatty acid is an unsaturated fatty acid.
Most unsaturated fats are liquid at room temperature and are called oils. If there is one double bond in the
molecule, then it is known as a monounsaturated fat (e.g., olive oil), and if there is more than one double bond, then
it is known as a polyunsaturated fat (e.g., canola oil).
Saturated fats tend to get packed tightly and are solid at room temperature. Animal fats with stearic acid and
palmitic acid contained in meat, and the fat with butyric acid contained in butter, are examples of saturated fats.
Mammals store fats in specialized cells called adipocytes, where globules of fat occupy most of the cell. In plants,
fat or oil is stored in seeds and is used as a source of energy during embryonic development.
Unsaturated fats or oils are usually of plant origin and contain unsaturated fatty acids. The double bond causes a
bend or a “kink” that prevents the fatty acids from packing tightly, keeping them liquid at room temperature. Olive
oil, corn oil, canola oil, and cod liver oil are examples of unsaturated fats. Unsaturated fats help to improve blood
cholesterol levels, whereas saturated fats might contribute to plaque formation in the arteries, which increases the
risk of a heart attack.
In the food industry, oils are artificially hydrogenated to make them semi-solid, leading to less spoilage and
increased shelf life. Simply speaking, hydrogen gas is bubbled through oils to solidify them. During this
hydrogenation process, double bonds of the cis-conformation in the hydrocarbon chain may be converted to double
bonds in the trans-conformation. This forms a trans-fat from a cis-fat. The orientation of the double bonds affects
the chemical properties of the fat (Figure 2.19).
FIGURE 2.19 During the hydrogenation process, the orientation around the double bonds is changed, making a trans-fat from a cis-fat. This
changes the chemical properties of the molecule.
Margarine, some types of peanut butter, and shortening are examples of artificially hydrogenated trans-fats. Recent
studies have shown that an increase in trans-fats in the human diet may lead to an increase in levels of low-density
lipoprotein (LDL), or “bad” cholesterol, which, in turn, may lead to plaque deposition in the arteries, resulting in
heart disease. Many fast food restaurants have recently eliminated the use of trans-fats, and U.S. food labels are
now required to list their trans-fat content.
Essential fatty acids are fatty acids that are required but not synthesized by the human body. Consequently, they
must be supplemented through the diet. Omega-3 fatty acids fall into this category and are one of only two known
essential fatty acids for humans (the other being omega-6 fatty acids). They are a type of polyunsaturated fat and
Access for free at openstax.org2.3 • Biological Molecules
are called omega-3 fatty acids because the third carbon from the end of the fatty acid participates in a double bond.
Salmon, trout, and tuna are good sources of omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-3 fatty acids are important in brain
function and normal growth and development. They may also prevent heart disease and reduce the risk of cancer.
Like carbohydrates, fats have received a lot of bad publicity. It is true that eating an excess of fried foods and other
“fatty” foods leads to weight gain. However, fats do have important functions. Fats serve as long-term energy
storage. They also provide insulation for the body. Therefore, “healthy” unsaturated fats in moderate amounts
should be consumed on a regular basis.
Phospholipids are the major constituent of the plasma membrane. Like fats, they are composed of fatty acid chains
attached to a glycerol or similar backbone. Instead of three fatty acids attached, however, there are two fatty acids
and the third carbon of the glycerol backbone is bound to a phosphate group. The phosphate group is modified by
the addition of an alcohol.
A phospholipid has both hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions. The fatty acid chains are hydrophobic and exclude
themselves from water, whereas the phosphate is hydrophilic and interacts with water.
Cells are surrounded by a membrane, which has a bilayer of phospholipids. The fatty acids of phospholipids face
inside, away from water, whereas the phosphate group can face either the outside environment or the inside of the
cell, which are both aqueous.
Steroids and Waxes
Unlike the phospholipids and fats discussed earlier, steroids have a ring structure. Although they do not resemble
other lipids, they are grouped with them because they are also hydrophobic. All steroids have four, linked carbon
rings and several of them, like cholesterol, have a short tail.
Cholesterol is a steroid. Cholesterol is mainly synthesized in the liver and is the precursor of many steroid hormones,
such as testosterone and estradiol. It is also the precursor of vitamins E and K. Cholesterol is the precursor of bile
salts, which help in the breakdown of fats and their subsequent absorption by cells. Although cholesterol is often
spoken of in negative terms, it is necessary for the proper functioning of the body. It is a key component of the
plasma membranes of animal cells.
Waxes are made up of a hydrocarbon chain with an alcohol (–OH) group and a fatty acid. Examples of animal waxes
include beeswax and lanolin. Plants also have waxes, such as the coating on their leaves, that helps prevent them
from drying out.
LINK TO LEARNING
For an additional perspective on lipids, watch this video about types of fat (http://openstax.org/l/lipids).
Proteins
Proteins are one of the most abundant organic molecules in living systems and have the most diverse range of
functions of all macromolecules. Proteins may be structural, regulatory, contractile, or protective; they may serve in
transport, storage, or membranes; or they may be toxins or enzymes. Each cell in a living system may contain
thousands of different proteins, each with a unique function. Their structures, like their functions, vary greatly. They
are all, however, polymers of amino acids, arranged in a linear sequence.
The functions of proteins are very diverse because there are 20 different chemically distinct amino acids that form
long chains, and the amino acids can be in any order. For example, proteins can function as enzymes or hormones.
Enzymes, which are produced by living cells, are catalysts in biochemical reactions (like digestion) and are usually
proteins. Each enzyme is specific for the substrate (a reactant that binds to an enzyme) upon which it acts. Enzymes
can function to break molecular bonds, to rearrange bonds, or to form new bonds. An example of an enzyme is
salivary amylase, which breaks down amylose, a component of starch.
Hormones are chemical signaling molecules, usually proteins or steroids, secreted by an endocrine gland or group
of endocrine cells that act to control or regulate specific physiological processes, including growth, development,
4546
2 • Chemistry of Life
metabolism, and reproduction. For example, insulin is a protein hormone that maintains blood glucose levels.
Proteins have different shapes and molecular weights; some proteins are globular in shape whereas others are
fibrous in nature. For example, hemoglobin is a globular protein, but collagen, found in our skin, is a fibrous protein.
Protein shape is critical to its function. Changes in temperature, pH, and exposure to chemicals may lead to
permanent changes in the shape of the protein, leading to a loss of function or denaturation (to be discussed in
more detail later). All proteins are made up of different arrangements of the same 20 kinds of amino acids.
Amino acids are the monomers that make up proteins. Each amino acid has the same fundamental structure, which
consists of a central carbon atom bonded to an amino group (–NH2), a carboxyl group (–COOH), and a hydrogen
atom. Every amino acid also has another variable atom or group of atoms bonded to the central carbon atom known
as the R group. The R group is the only difference in structure between the 20 amino acids; otherwise, the amino
acids are identical (Figure 2.20).
FIGURE 2.20 Amino acids are made up of a central carbon bonded to an amino group (–NH2), a carboxyl group (–COOH), and a hydrogen
atom. The central carbon’s fourth bond varies among the different amino acids, as seen in these examples of alanine, valine, lysine, and
aspartic acid.
The chemical nature of the R group determines the chemical nature of the amino acid within its protein (that is,
whether it is acidic, basic, polar, or nonpolar).
The sequence and number of amino acids ultimately determine a protein’s shape, size, and function. Each amino
acid is attached to another amino acid by a covalent bond, known as a peptide bond, which is formed by a
dehydration reaction. The carboxyl group of one amino acid and the amino group of a second amino acid combine,
releasing a water molecule. The resulting bond is the peptide bond.
The products formed by such a linkage are called polypeptides. While the terms polypeptide and protein are
Access for free at openstax.org2.3 • Biological Molecules
sometimes used interchangeably, a polypeptide is technically a polymer of amino acids, whereas the term protein is
used for a polypeptide or polypeptides that have combined together, have a distinct shape, and have a unique
function.
EVOLUTION CONNECTION
The Evolutionary Significance of Cytochrome c
Cytochrome c is an important component of the molecular machinery that harvests energy from glucose. Because
this protein’s role in producing cellular energy is crucial, it has changed very little over millions of years. Protein
sequencing has shown that there is a considerable amount of sequence similarity among cytochrome c molecules of
different species; evolutionary relationships can be assessed by measuring the similarities or differences among
various species’ protein sequences.
For example, scientists have determined that human cytochrome c contains 104 amino acids. For each cytochrome
c molecule that has been sequenced to date from different organisms, 37 of these amino acids appear in the same
position in each cytochrome c. This indicates that all of these organisms are descended from a common ancestor.
On comparing the human and chimpanzee protein sequences, no sequence difference was found. When human and
rhesus monkey sequences were compared, a single difference was found in one amino acid. In contrast, human-to-
yeast comparisons show a difference in 44 amino acids, suggesting that humans and chimpanzees have a more
recent common ancestor than humans and the rhesus monkey, or humans and yeast.
Protein Structure
As discussed earlier, the shape of a protein is critical to its function. To understand how the protein gets its final
shape or conformation, we need to understand the four levels of protein structure: primary, secondary, tertiary, and
quaternary (Figure 2.21).
The unique sequence and number of amino acids in a polypeptide chain is its primary structure. The unique
sequence for every protein is ultimately determined by the gene that encodes the protein. Any change in the gene
sequence may lead to a different amino acid being added to the polypeptide chain, causing a change in protein
structure and function. William Warrick Cardozo showed that sickle-cell anemia is caused by a change in protein
strucure as a result of gene encoding, meaning that it is an inherited disorder. In sickle cell anemia, the hemoglobin
β chain has a single amino acid substitution, causing a change in both the structure and function of the protein.
What is most remarkable to consider is that a hemoglobin molecule is made up of two alpha chains and two beta
chains that each consist of about 150 amino acids. The molecule, therefore, has about 600 amino acids. The
structural difference between a normal hemoglobin molecule and a sickle cell molecule—that dramatically
decreases life expectancy in the affected individuals—is a single amino acid of the 600.
Because of this change of one amino acid in the chain, the normally biconcave, or disc-shaped, red blood cells
assume a crescent or “sickle” shape, which clogs arteries. This can lead to a myriad of serious health problems,
such as breathlessness, dizziness, headaches, and abdominal pain for those who have this disease.
Folding patterns resulting from interactions between the non-R group portions of amino acids give rise to the
secondary structure of the protein. The most common are the alpha (α)-helix and beta (β)-pleated sheet structures.
Both structures are held in shape by hydrogen bonds. In the alpha helix, the bonds form between every fourth
amino acid and cause a twist in the amino acid chain.
In the β-pleated sheet, the “pleats” are formed by hydrogen bonding between atoms on the backbone of the
polypeptide chain. The R groups are attached to the carbons, and extend above and below the folds of the pleat. The
pleated segments align parallel to each other, and hydrogen bonds form between the same pairs of atoms on each
of the aligned amino acids. The α-helix and β-pleated sheet structures are found in many globular and fibrous
proteins.
The unique three-dimensional structure of a polypeptide is known as its tertiary structure. This structure is caused
by chemical interactions between various amino acids and regions of the polypeptide. Primarily, the interactions
among R groups create the complex three-dimensional tertiary structure of a protein. There may be ionic bonds
4748
2 • Chemistry of Life
formed between R groups on different amino acids, or hydrogen bonding beyond that involved in the secondary
structure. When protein folding takes place, the hydrophobic R groups of nonpolar amino acids lay in the interior of
the protein, whereas the hydrophilic R groups lay on the outside. The former types of interactions are also known as
hydrophobic interactions.
In nature, some proteins are formed from several polypeptides, also known as subunits, and the interaction of these
subunits forms the quaternary structure. Weak interactions between the subunits help to stabilize the overall
structure. For example, hemoglobin is a combination of four polypeptide subunits.
FIGURE 2.21 The four levels of protein structure can be observed in these illustrations. (credit: modification of work by National Human
Genome Research Institute)
Each protein has its own unique sequence and shape held together by chemical interactions. If the protein is subject
to changes in temperature, pH, or exposure to chemicals, the protein structure may change, losing its shape in what
is known as denaturation as discussed earlier. Denaturation is often reversible because the primary structure is
preserved if the denaturing agent is removed, allowing the protein to resume its function. Sometimes denaturation
is irreversible, leading to a loss of function. One example of protein denaturation can be seen when an egg is fried or
boiled. The albumin protein in the liquid egg white is denatured when placed in a hot pan, changing from a clear
substance to an opaque white substance. Not all proteins are denatured at high temperatures; for instance, bacteria
that survive in hot springs have proteins that are adapted to function at those temperatures.
LINK TO LEARNING
For an additional perspective on proteins, explore “Biomolecules: The Proteins” through this interactive animation
(http://openstax.org/l/proteins).
Access for free at openstax.org2.3 • Biological Molecules
Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids are key macromolecules in the continuity of life. They carry the genetic blueprint of a cell and carry
instructions for the functioning of the cell.
The two main types of nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). DNA is the
genetic material found in all living organisms, ranging from single-celled bacteria to multicellular mammals.
The other type of nucleic acid, RNA, is mostly involved in protein synthesis. The DNA molecules never leave the
nucleus, but instead use an RNA intermediary to communicate with the rest of the cell. Other types of RNA are also
involved in protein synthesis and its regulation.
DNA and RNA are made up of monomers known as nucleotides. The nucleotides combine with each other to form a
polynucleotide, DNA or RNA. Each nucleotide is made up of three components: a nitrogenous base, a pentose (five-
carbon) sugar, and a phosphate group (Figure 2.22). Each nitrogenous base in a nucleotide is attached to a sugar
molecule, which is attached to a phosphate group.
FIGURE 2.22 A nucleotide is made up of three components: a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar, and a phosphate group.
DNA Double-Helical Structure
DNA has a double-helical structure (Figure 2.23). It is composed of two strands, or polymers, of nucleotides. The
strands are formed with bonds between phosphate and sugar groups of adjacent nucleotides. The strands are
bonded to each other at their bases with hydrogen bonds, and the strands coil about each other along their length,
hence the “double helix” description, which means a double spiral.
FIGURE 2.23 The double-helix model shows DNA as two parallel strands of intertwining molecules. (credit: Jerome Walker, Dennis Myts)
The alternating sugar and phosphate groups lie on the outside of each strand, forming the backbone of the DNA. The
nitrogenous bases are stacked in the interior, like the steps of a staircase, and these bases pair; the pairs are bound
4950
2 • Chemistry of Life
to each other by hydrogen bonds. The bases pair in such a way that the distance between the backbones of the two
strands is the same all along the molecule.
Access for free at openstax.org2 • Key Terms
51
Key Terms
acid a substance that donates hydrogen ions and
therefore lowers pH
adhesion the attraction between water molecules
and molecules of a different substance
amino acid a monomer of a protein
anion a negative ion formed by gaining electrons
atomic number the number of protons in an atom
base a substance that absorbs hydrogen ions and
therefore raises pH
buffer a solution that resists a change in pH by
absorbing or releasing hydrogen or hydroxide ions
carbohydrate a biological macromolecule in which
the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen is 1:2:1;
carbohydrates serve as energy sources and
structural support in cells
cation a positive ion formed by losing electrons
cellulose a polysaccharide that makes up the cell
walls of plants and provides structural support to
the cell
chemical bond an interaction between two or more
of the same or different elements that results in the
formation of molecules
chitin a type of carbohydrate that forms the outer
skeleton of arthropods, such as insects and
crustaceans, and the cell walls of fungi
cohesion the intermolecular forces between water
molecules caused by the polar nature of water;
creates surface tension
covalent bond a type of strong bond between two or
more of the same or different elements; forms when
electrons are shared between elements
denaturation the loss of shape in a protein as a result
of changes in temperature, pH, or exposure to
chemicals
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) a double-stranded
polymer of nucleotides that carries the hereditary
information of the cell
disaccharide two sugar monomers that are linked
together by a glycodsidic bond
electron a negatively charged particle that resides
outside of the nucleus in the electron orbital; lacks
functional mass and has a charge of –1
electron transfer the movement of electrons from
one element to another
element one of 118 unique substances that cannot
be broken down into smaller substances and retain
the characteristic of that substance; each element
has a specified number of protons and unique
properties
enzyme a catalyst in a biochemical reaction that is
usually a complex or conjugated protein
evaporation the release of water molecules from
liquid water to form water vapor
fat a lipid molecule composed of three fatty acids and
a glycerol (triglyceride) that typically exists in a solid
form at room temperature
glycogen a storage carbohydrate in animals
hormone a chemical signaling molecule, usually a
protein or steroid, secreted by an endocrine gland or
group of endocrine cells; acts to control or regulate
specific physiological processes
hydrogen bond a weak bond between partially
positively charged hydrogen atoms and partially
negatively charged elements or molecules
hydrophilic describes a substance that dissolves in
water; water-loving
hydrophobic describes a substance that does not
dissolve in water; water-fearing
ion an atom or compound that does not contain equal
numbers of protons and electrons, and therefore
has a net charge
ionic bond a chemical bond that forms between ions
of opposite charges
isotope one or more forms of an element that have
different numbers of neutrons
lipids a class of macromolecules that are nonpolar
and insoluble in water
litmus paper filter paper that has been treated with a
natural water-soluble dye so it can be used as a pH
indicator
macromolecule a large molecule, often formed by
polymerization of smaller monomers
mass number the number of protons plus neutrons in
an atom
matter anything that has mass and occupies space
monosaccharide a single unit or monomer of
carbohydrates
neutron a particle with no charge that resides in the
nucleus of an atom; has a mass of 1
nonpolar covalent bond a type of covalent bond that
forms between atoms when electrons are shared
equally between atoms, resulting in no regions with
partial charges as in polar covalent bonds
nucleic acid a biological macromolecule that carries
the genetic information of a cell and carries
instructions for the functioning of the cell
nucleotide a monomer of nucleic acids; contains a
pentose sugar, a phosphate group, and a
nitrogenous base
nucleus (chemistry) the dense center of an atom
made up of protons and (except in the case of a
hydrogen atom) neutrons
octet rule states that the outermost shell of an
element with a low atomic number can hold eight52
2 • Chapter Summary
electrons
oil an unsaturated fat that is a liquid at room
temperature
periodic table of elements an organizational chart of
elements, indicating the atomic number and mass
number of each element; also provides key
information about the properties of elements
pH scale a scale ranging from 0 to 14 that measures
the approximate concentration of hydrogen ions of a
substance
phospholipid a major constituent of the membranes
of cells; composed of two fatty acids and a
phosphate group attached to the glycerol backbone
polar covalent bond a type of covalent bond in which
electrons are pulled toward one atom and away
from another, resulting in slightly positive and
slightly negative charged regions of the molecule
polypeptide a long chain of amino acids linked by
peptide bonds
polysaccharide a long chain of monosaccharides;
may be branched or unbranched
protein a biological macromolecule composed of one
or more chains of amino acids
proton a positively charged particle that resides in
the nucleus of an atom; has a mass of 1 and a
charge of +1
radioactive isotope an isotope that spontaneously
emits particles or energy to form a more stable
element
ribonucleic acid (RNA) a single-stranded polymer of
nucleotides that is involved in protein synthesis
saturated fatty acid a long-chain hydrocarbon with
single covalent bonds in the carbon chain; the
number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon
skeleton is maximized
solvent a substance capable of dissolving another
substance
starch a storage carbohydrate in plants
steroid a type of lipid composed of four fused
hydrocarbon rings
surface tension the cohesive force at the surface of a
body of liquid that prevents the molecules from
separating
temperature a measure of molecular motion
trans-fat a form of unsaturated fat with the hydrogen
atoms neighboring the double bond across from
each other rather than on the same side of the
double bond
triglyceride a fat molecule; consists of three fatty
acids linked to a glycerol molecule
unsaturated fatty acid a long-chain hydrocarbon that
has one or more than one double bonds in the
hydrocarbon chain
van der Waals interaction a weak attraction or
interaction between molecules caused by slightly
positively charged or slightly negatively charged
atoms
Chapter Summary
2.1 The Building Blocks of Molecules
Matter is anything that occupies space and has mass. It
is made up of atoms of different elements. All of the 92
elements that occur naturally have unique qualities
that allow them to combine in various ways to create
compounds or molecules. Atoms, which consist of
protons, neutrons, and electrons, are the smallest units
of an element that retain all of the properties of that
element. Electrons can be donated or shared between
atoms to create bonds, including ionic, covalent, and
hydrogen bonds, as well as van der Waals interactions.
2.2 Water
Water has many properties that are critical to
maintaining life. It is polar, allowing for the formation of
hydrogen bonds, which allow ions and other polar
molecules to dissolve in water. Therefore, water is an
excellent solvent. The hydrogen bonds between water
molecules give water the ability to hold heat better
than many other substances. As the temperature rises,
the hydrogen bonds between water continually break
and reform, allowing for the overall temperature to
Access for free at openstax.org
remain stable, although increased energy is added to
the system. Water’s cohesive forces allow for the
property of surface tension. All of these unique
properties of water are important in the chemistry of
living organisms.
The pH of a solution is a measure of the concentration
of hydrogen ions in the solution. A solution with a high
number of hydrogen ions is acidic and has a low pH
value. A solution with a high number of hydroxide ions
is basic and has a high pH value. The pH scale ranges
from 0 to 14, with a pH of 7 being neutral. Buffers are
solutions that moderate pH changes when an acid or
base is added to the buffer system. Buffers are
important in biological systems because of their ability
to maintain constant pH conditions.
2.3 Biological Molecules
Living things are carbon-based because carbon plays
such a prominent role in the chemistry of living things.
The four covalent bonding positions of the carbon atom
can give rise to a wide diversity of compounds with
many functions, accounting for the importance of2 • Visual Connection Questions
carbon in living things. Carbohydrates are a group of
macromolecules that are a vital energy source for the
cell, provide structural support to many organisms, and
can be found on the surface of the cell as receptors or
for cell recognition. Carbohydrates are classified as
monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides,
depending on the number of monomers in the
molecule.
Lipids are a class of macromolecules that are nonpolar
and hydrophobic in nature. Major types include fats
and oils, waxes, phospholipids, and steroids. Fats and
oils are a stored form of energy and can include
triglycerides. Fats and oils are usually made up of fatty
acids and glycerol.
Proteins are a class of macromolecules that can
53
perform a diverse range of functions for the cell. They
help in metabolism by providing structural support and
by acting as enzymes, carriers or as hormones. The
building blocks of proteins are amino acids. Proteins
are organized at four levels: primary, secondary,
tertiary, and quaternary. Protein shape and function are
intricately linked; any change in shape caused by
changes in temperature, pH, or chemical exposure may
lead to protein denaturation and a loss of function.
Nucleic acids are molecules made up of repeating units
of nucleotides that direct cellular activities such as cell
division and protein synthesis. Each nucleotide is made
up of a pentose sugar, a nitrogenous base, and a
phosphate group. There are two types of nucleic acids:
DNA and RNA.
Visual Connection Questions
1. Figure 2.3 How many neutrons do (K) potassium-39
and potassium-40 have, respectively?
Review Questions
2. Magnesium has an atomic number of 12. Which of
the following statements is true of a neutral
magnesium atom?
a. It has 12 protons, 12 electrons, and 12
neutrons.
b. It has 12 protons, 12 electrons, and six
neutrons.
c. It has six protons, six electrons, and no
neutrons.
d. It has six protons, six electrons, and six
neutrons.
3. Which type of bond represents a weak chemical
bond?
a. hydrogen bond
b. ionic bond
c. covalent bond
d. polar covalent bond
4. An isotope of sodium (Na) has a mass number of
22. How many neutrons does it have?
a. 11
b. 12
c. 22
d. 44
5. Which of the following statements is not true?
a. Water is polar.
b. Water stabilizes temperature.
c. Water is essential for life.
d. Water is the most abundant atom in Earth’s
atmosphere.
6. Using a pH meter, you find the pH of an unknown
solution to be 8.0. How would you describe this
solution?
a. weakly acidic
b. strongly acidic
c. weakly basic
d. strongly basic
7. The pH of lemon juice is about 2.0, whereas tomato
juice's pH is about 4.0. Approximately how much of
an increase in hydrogen ion concentration is there
between tomato juice and lemon juice?
a. 2 times
b. 10 times
c. 100 times
d. 1000 times
8. An example of a monosaccharide is ________.
a. fructose
b. glucose
c. galactose
d. all of the above54
2 • Critical Thinking Questions
9. Cellulose and starch are examples of ________.
a. monosaccharides
b. disaccharides
c. lipids
d. polysaccharides
11. The monomers that make up proteins are called
_________.
a. nucleotides
b. disaccharides
c. amino acids
d. chaperones
10. Phospholipids are important components of
__________.
a. the plasma membrane of cells
b. the ring structure of steroids
c. the waxy covering on leaves
d. the double bond in hydrocarbon chains
Critical Thinking Questions
12. Why are hydrogen bonds and van der Waals
interactions necessary for cells?15. Explain at least three functions that lipids serve in
plants and/or animals.
13. Why can some insects walk on water?16. Explain what happens if even one amino acid is
substituted for another in a polypeptide chain.
Provide a specific example.
14. Explain why water is an excellent solvent.
Access for free at openstax.org
